---
layout: post
title: Dick Graham (Grief Work pt. III)
date: '1999-12-02 00:00:00'
---


After a long Thanksgiving weekend filled with good food and small graces, I took another long drive out of the city of Philadelphia on Monday morning. Jen (my traveling companion and sparring partner) had left Philadelphia International at the ridiculous hour of 6:30 a.m., so we’d stayed the night at the Airport Marriott, and walked across the concourse to her gate. After she boarded, I went back to the room and slept a little longer. Along the way, I had to pass through two metal detectors, and set off the second. How I could pass through four in all, and only cause a stir at the fourth, was beyond me. It seemed a bit absurd, particularly since my watch and single piece of change—a quarter—were sitting in the guard’s bucket. Not only that, but I wasn’t even on my way to a gate, just back to the hotel. But I was too tired and groggy to fuss, so I let the guard wave a wand around my butt and tell me that my electronic door lock for the hotel room was setting things off. I put my paper down on the x-ray machine to be scanned, and had to double back for it a minute or two later.  
 When I woke up from my nap, I watched a bit of The Last Emperor on the hotel television, then showered and went on my merry way. I had decided to search for a couple of comic book stores on my way out of town, so I drove up Interstate 76 to South Street, and headed for Rittenhouse Square. Sadly, the store I was looking for wasn’t there, and I didn’t want to spend the morning hunting. So I turned the truck around, passed Drexel University on the other side of the freeway, and headed out Lancaster Avenue, reversing the trip we’d made in the night before.  
 If you’ve ever traveled the length of Lancaster Avenue, you’ll know what an adventure this was. The foot of the avenue, just to the west of Drexel, has to be one of the worst neighborhoods I’ve ever seen. Ruined houses and steel-shuttered stores lie cheek-by-jowl by junkyards, formal or otherwise, and the decaying infrastructure of a very old metropolitan area. Were it not for the modern-looking electric trolley running down the middle of the street and the Jamaican restaurants, you could mistake the place for London the morning after the first blitz. I’ve never seen so many collapsed houses allowed to stand in one neighborhood.   
 As you can imagine, I feel in love with the place immediately. It teemed with life and vitality, and something in me yearned to help reclaim its forgotten corners and rotting buildings. Let’s not get too romantic about it, though. I was scared stiff when some cops steered my line of traffic off the main drag onto a momentary detour through some small, tight side streets. All it takes is one cranky drug dealer, I thought…When I made it back to Lancaster Avenue, I was annoyed almost beyond description by the locals who seemed unable to move down a perfectly clear street without weaving and braking irrationally. Sometimes, they would just stop for no good reason and sit in the middle of the street, blinking and looking around. I finally realized that there must be a different sense of geography here, one not so dependent on yellow lines and the orderly flow of cars to someplace else.  
 After a high school, the street took a sharp turn to the right, and within a block, had shifted to a more upscale neighborhood. It seemed like it only took me a few seconds to move from the ghetto to a Main Line suburb, with fenced-in lawns and split-level ranchers predominating. A little further took me past the massive St. Charles Borromeo Catholic Seminary and the more modest Eastern Baptist Seminary across the street. Then it was into Bryn Mawr, with its boutiques and ritzy supermarkets. I can’t complain about them: one of the boutiques was a comic book store where I dropped about sixty bucks, and the local ritzy supermarket was kind enough to take American Express for some deodorant, a new toothbrush, and some Pop Tarts.  
 And so it went. Sometimes the Avenue would be a wealthy, almost snobbish district. Around Villanova, I saw more Mercedes and Lexuses than anything. Other times, it was home to American Legion posts and tanning salons. Along the way, I saw a funeral procession with somewhere between 50 and 75 cars. I swear it stretched nearly a mile. Not too far beyond that, the Avenue turned to large, modern condominium complexes and suburban office parks. Two miles later, I passed a Home Depot and turned onto the bypass to Lancaster. It had taken me a little more than an hour of driving to make it from downtown to the fringes of the suburbs. Within half an hour, I was in Amish country in Lancaster county, and by the time my second hour in the truck rolled around, I was well back into the city of Lancaster.  
 Despite my dawdling, I was in a hurry to get back to town. I had to go meet with Betty Graham, whose husband Dick had passed away on Sunday. He had prostate cancer that had spread throughout his body: to the bladder, the colon, the lungs. After a two-year battle, he had finally succumbed. I went to see him at the hospice center the night before he died. He had lost ten or fifteen pounds just in the week since I’d last visited with him. His skin had turned orange because some of his internal organs had shut down. He looked like a victim of the Holocaust, and every breath he took sounded painful. I honestly thought he might die while I was in the room. Despite all this, he could still open his eyes and apparently recognize who was speaking to him. So I sat and prayed and talked to him for about half an hour, then kissed his forehead and told him that if he went, he should go in peace. The look he gave me almost defies description: he seemed surprised that I was still there, maybe a little angry that I was leaving. But there was also a distinct note of farewell. He knew we wouldn’t see each other again, and he wanted to say goodbye, even though his tongue no longer worked. I told him not to pinch the nurses, and that I would be by to see him the next afternoon. A parishioner delivered a note in the middle of church, informing me that he had died a few minutes earlier.  
 I had spoken with Betty from the hotel, as well as with the polite young funeral director, but nothing really replaces the physical presence of a pastor at a time like this. So I had a quick snack at home—a cup of coffee to ward off a headache and an apple to tide me over till dinnertime—and headed down to the office. I spent an hour there reading through Russ Mitman’s essay on funerals in his excellent Worship Vessels—buy it if you can find it—before heading over to Betty’s house.  
 She gave me a big hug when I came in, but said that in all she felt “relieved” that Dick had passed on. He had begun to suffer at the end, and she felt like she could no longer care for him. Better for him to go, she said, than to stay here and be miserable. She wanted to talk about his passing a little, but mainly, we talked about preparations for his service. I showed her what I wanted to do, and checked a few out-of-the-ordinary aspects with her. For example, at the close of the viewing, I wanted the casket to be moved from in front of the altar to the center aisle, so that Dick would essentially join us in the congregation. And rather than wait for everyone to leave before removing the casket, I suggested, why not bring it and the family out first, while the congregation sang one last hymn? Betty was agreeable—as long as I did a good job, I could have a pretty free hand, which I have learned is fairly typical in a situation like this. There was only one difficult part of the whole conversation. I suggested a reading from the Gospel of John to Betty, and read it out loud for her:  
Truly, truly I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit. Whoever serves me must follow me; and where I am, there shall my servant be also.  
I couldn’t help myself. I broke down and started crying. Betty started to cry too, and reached over to give me another hug. “He was your friend too, wasn’t he?” she said. And he was: we had grown close over the course of a year of visits. He was a wonderful man, and I felt—still feel—lucky to have met him.   
 In a way, it seemed outrageous that I should do his funeral on Wednesday. For one thing, I felt like bawling for about half the service. Here the congregation was looking to me for strength and comfort, and I wasn’t completely sure my voice wouldn’t waver when I read the prayers. But that’s part of being a minister, too. We are not supermen, but men (and women) of God. I’m sure God wept at this service, too. I tried to stay as together as I could, but was not shy about telling people that it affected me, too. This was the first time I could honestly say that I was burying a friend, and the responsibility seemed awesome to me. I wanted, simply, to make sure that he got a good send-off. That is the goal for everyone who’s buried from our church, but this time it had a special weight to it. I was keenly aware of the gift of Dick’s friendship—I mean that I felt as though he were a better friend to me than I to him—and it embarrassed, even shamed me a little, to realize that he would have been the first to thank and congratulate me on a job well done whether or not I deserved it. Grace, someone said, isn’t real until you think it’s not rightfully yours.  
 The service itself went well, if I do say so myself. The prayers seemed to hit home with people. By the second verse of “How Great Thou Art,” Dick’s stepson Jeff had to rush out, overcome by grief. My sermon was widely ignored (also fairly typical in a situation like this), but tributes from another stepson and two granddaughters were well-received. I heard someone sobbing behind me as one of the young women spoke. The service went longer than I expected—nearly an hour—but it felt complete and worshipful. By the time they rolled the casket out, people were ready to let go and move on, which is the whole point.   
 The committal service at the gravesite also went well, despite a sharp cold snap that morning. The undertakers were surprised to see me wearing my robes with no topcoat, but I lied and told them the robes were warmer than they looked. The truth is that I have no overcoat. Jen has already ordered me to look for one. Behind the shelter of the memorial tent, I said a few quick prayers and sprinkled some sand on the coffin. A color guard from the local American Legion came in and folded the flag and presented it to Betty. A bugler sounded “Taps,” but thankfully, there was no twenty-one gun salute. Betty and Dick’s daughters put some roses on the coffin, and then we all hurried back to our cars. The wind cut like a knife, and we were all glad to get back to church for the luncheon.  
 It’s been a long time since someone this close to me died. The last time was when my beloved high-school English teacher Mrs. Palmer died about ten years ago. I had forgotten in that time the quietness of what grief does to you, the calm and almost unnoticeable ways it digs into your life. Once in a while, I think about seeing Dick in his coffin. It disturbs me a little that he looked better in death than in the last few days of his life. It still puzzles me that the man I talked to a little less than two weeks ago is now under six feet of dirt and sod, waiting for the worms to take him. I have to stop and think before I remember that I don’t have to go see him this coming Sunday, as had been my habit. I may stop by to see Betty, but we’ll sit out in the living room, not in the sun room at the back of the house, where Dick’s hospital bed was set up in the past few months.  
 Most of all—and this is why I brought up my exodus through Lancaster Avenue—it confounds me to think that Dick is now committed solely to our memories. It struck me as I traveled along that single by-way that it takes a tremendous amount of memory to capture even the buildings of a single street. How to adequately describe the hundreds of shops, houses, apartment buildings, malls, hospitals, seminaries, train stops, parks, office buildings, ruins along those few miles? And if this is just one street that I have seen, how much more is stored away up there? Should I begin to wax eloquent about Franklin Avenue in the Twin Cities? Peachtree Street in Atlanta? Monroe Street or Williamson in Madison Wisconsin, my hometown? And how many more streets and roads had Dick seen in his years of rambling across the country? Yet now all his memories were gone, consigned to the ground and the afterlife. It seemed less sad than strange, having come fresh from a weekend of accumulating good memories, to realize that at some point, we lose our memory and in that very moment become nothing more than a figment of someone else’s. I wondered if someone would look back on their deathbed and see an image of me walking down some random avenue, as I had seen people walking in Philadelphia. Is that what becomes of us? I thought. Will we live on in memory, and there alone?  
 Well, and what of it? Eternal life consists in being fondly remembered by one’s friends and family, said Martin Buber. What could better? he asked. I don’t know. I just hope that when I die, I am remembered as fondly as Dick Graham was.


