---
layout: post
title: "“Theodidiocy”"
date: '1999-07-13 00:27:35'
---


It’s not my place to complain—but on the other hand, this is my column, so what the heck. For a variety of reasons, not all of which I am at liberty to disclose, I’ve had a pretty lousy week.

 Put it this way. When the day begins with the gentle odor of a cat present left on your living room floor, and continues with the bank calling to ask if you’ve forgotten to make a deposit recently, you know you’re in for a long week. Add in recovering from a broken rib, trying to sort out various personal and professional relationships (that’s the part I can’t talk about), and visiting six parishioners in the hospital, and you know that it’s time to call for help. So it looks like I’m therapy-bound again. Sometimes you just have to talk your problems out—not because you’re in crisis, but simply to have a safe place to park your emotions. As I’ve told a few people, I want my stuff to stay my stuff, and the church’s stuff to remain theirs. This helps to insure that I don’t go ape on one of the little old ladies, at least not without a good reason; and it helps to insure that the anxieties of the covenantal community aren’t transferred to their pastor. I’m banged up enough without taking on the hostility between cousins in Faith church’s largest extended family, thanks. It’s also true that, having been handed all of these, um, opportunities, I would like to grow through them. If you’re going to suffer, you might just as well learn something from it while you can.

 A noble sentiment, if I do say so myself. It’s also one that’s pretty tough to live up to. Isn’t the first instinct normally to run from suffering? Mine sure was. After I made that bank deposit that I’d been forgetting about, I gave myself permission to hop in the truck and take a ride. Pastor needs a sanity break. I stopped by a convenience store on the way out of town and bought a bottle of grape soda and a pack of Lucky Strikes, both comfort food in their own way. Yes, I admit it: I relapsed. At least it took me until Saturday to smoke the whole pack, and since then, I haven’t had any. Still, the bottom line remains that nicotine is the drug of choice when I’m over my stress limit, and I’m not very comfortable with that.

 In any case, I drove south out of the city of Lancaster and headed for the Susquehanna river. I wound up at the overlook above the Holtwood dam, spending half an hour smoking a Lucky and watching a couple of turkey buzzards glide above the old power plant below. It was a hot day, but dry; we’ve been in a drought in Pennsylvania. Still, I was surprised to see three-quarters of the riverbed exposed and covered in weeds. It looked like the broad, flat valley had been turned overnight into a meadow, and I half-expected to see a herd of dairy cows wandering in the lush new growth.    
 Surprisingly enough, though, there’s only so much time you can spend fantasizing about cows. Twenty minutes must be my upper limit, because after that, it was time to go. I got back in the truck and popped in a Marvin Gaye tape, singing along with it all the way home. This was amazingly therapeutic, and thankfully, there were no Amish farmers out in the field to overhear my bizarre healing process.

 But as I was saying, my first impulse when trouble weighs me down is to run away. Escape is in fact an honorable method of addressing your problems—if you can’t beat ‘em, duck ‘em, I always say. But it only works for so long, and then you have to deal with your issues. It’s there that the sticky wicket really begins, because if you want to learn from your troubles, you have to trust that there is something to be learned, and I’m just not sure that I have that trust at the moment.

 There’s a dream-like way of explaining what I mean. The storefront of my brain hates to think that all the stuff that’s happened to me in the past week is meaningless, or close to it. It seems like I ought to be able to offer my customers some shiny, easily-swallowed way of understanding all that’s happened. I fell off my bike because God wanted me to learn…I’ve been having a hard time getting along with certain people because… But I keep hearing this voice from the back room of my heart saying, “There’s nothing to be learned here; the warehouse has sent us no fresh insight for months now.” I ask the voice if it’s checked the top shelf for leftover wisdom, or behind the memory deep-freeze, but it just yells back that meaning takes time to develop, if it’s to be had at all. “Understanding cannot be gained in a day, Mr. Schultz,” the voice says, sounding just like Apu on the Simpsons, “it can only come at the end of the long and uncertain process of reflection. Thank you, come again!” Drat! The store’s out of platitudes again! Do you think I could substitute some generalities instead?

 Now, I make a lot of jokes about the situation, but underneath the wisecracks, it bothers me. Both the pastor and the writer in me want to tie up my last week in a nice little package and have done with it. This experience means this, and that experience means that… It’s profoundly frustrating for me not to have some kind of easily-formulated handle with which to grasp the past week. What I think I do for a living is to help people make meaning, and when I can’t do that for myself, I feel like a fraud. Doctor, heal thyself—and the only thing the doctor can think about is how drowsy his damn pain medication makes him…

 It’s not until I stop to think about it for a minute that I realize how deeply faithless that attitude is. Good German Reformed pastor that I am, I believe that it’s not for me to know the mysteries of the workings of the world. My job is to live in trust and hope that it will all make sense eventually. Also to live in trust and hope that I won’t fall off my bike again anytime soon, but we’re dealing with theodicy this week, not predestination. The point is that you can’t rush the making of meaning, because in the end, we don’t make meaning. God does, and reveals what has been made to us. That revelation takes place at its own chosen speed, and there’s not much you can do to rush things.

 So says the theologian in me. The comedian in me, however, says it would be fun to try. So while my boo-boos—both psycho- and physio-logical—mend, and while I practice the fine art of patience in discernment, I would like to announce a small contest. It’s simple enough: you tell me what the meaning of my suffering is, and I’ll publish the best answers. The grand champion will receive a used copy of Sartre’s *Being and Nothingness* and a rack of beef spareribs—broken, naturally. And remember, you’ll only read the results here, in A Pastor’s Notebook.


