---
layout: post
title: The Philadelphia Story
date: '1999-08-17 00:00:00'
---


Praise God from whom all blessings flow! I have been wondering when I would luck into a good story in Pennsylvania; there seems to be plenty to reflect on here, but not much to report directly. It’s almost like watching a stream cut through a barren desert plain: there’s water, but the grass is never green. When I lived in Atlanta, the stories would practically accost me—come to my door looking for a peanut-butter and jelly sandwich, or latch on to me at a convenience store and offer to play matchmaker—sometimes they would even get violent, as when I cracked up a Honda on the local freeway. But something’s different here in Lancaster. So far, the crackheads have stayed away from the front porch; the local grocers barely notice me, let alone offer to set me up with a Korean girl; my truck is still in one piece. *Inshallah*, these trends will continue.

 The stories I do hear or participate in tend to take place in the realm of the church, so most of them are either incomprehensible outside their context, or so private that I dare not repeat them. All of it adds up to a mighty dry spell for a storyteller. I am thirsty, I am parched for something funny and vivid to tell you all.

 With that kind of a build, whatever follows is bound to be a let-down, so let me put the pin in the balloon myself. I have only to report to you my trip to Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Center City Philadelphia to see an ailing parishioner, hardly the stuff of Nobel laureate literature.

 But not without its weird merits, either. Let me set the scene properly: I found out this past Sunday morning that a parishioner had had his car wrecked in New Jersey. The paramedics took him to a Jersey hospital, I guess in Camden or Cherry Hill, and the doctors checked him out. Aside from a few scrapes and bruises, the crash did nothing to him. But a CAT scan revealed aneurysms on either side of his aorta, and the doctors prescribed quick surgery. He had his choice: Jefferson, or another place in Trenton. The doctor recommended Jefferson, so that’s where he went. By coincidence, my friend Jen needed to be dropped off at the Philadelphia airport on Sunday night, so I volunteered to go visit my parishioner after her flight left. Jen wondered if I would have gone to see him anyway, and I have to say honestly that yes, I probably would have driven over to Philly the next day. But just you wreck your car in New York and see what happens!

 I stopped at an airport information desk and picked up a map of downtown Philadelphia with Jefferson Hospital circled on it. It turned out to be only a few blocks from Independence Hall. In fact, Jen and I had driven past it while trying to figure out how to leave Philly on Friday. So I got there with little trouble, other than having to figure out which streets ran one-way against me. It was marvelously odd to drive down the street right next to Independence Hall; it’s all of about 2.125 car-widths across. I swear I could have rolled down my window and touched the building where the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution were signed.

 Just past Independence Hall, I turned on to Sansom street, equally narrow, and drove up a block or two onto “Jewelers’ Row,” home to many of Philadelphia’s diamond and gold merchants. I would have thought that it would be an elegant, expensive-looking block, but it wasn’t. It looked sad and abandoned and a little down-at-the-heels, like a Russian relative stepping off the boat for the first time. A vacant-eyed cop stood at the corner and watched me pull out from the traffic light; around the corner, two of her colleagues patrolled the street. A few more blocks took me up to the hospital.

 In Philadelphia, trees grow on the buildings, so I’ve discovered. Right next door to the shiny neon and new brick of the hospital sat a ruined Empire-era building, its top floor windows busted, sitting jagged in their frames, and the bottom floors boarded up to keep the homeless out. Here and there a seed deposited by a bird had sprouted, and now seemed to be doing pretty well for itself, eight or ten floors above the streets. As weird as this process of urban reforestation looks, the Philadelphia Inquirer says that it’s expensive and difficult to remove the adventurous bushes, and so they’re usually left to grow in peace until rents paid justify taking them down. Just another oddity, like barbed wire atop the parking garages and streets too narrow to ride a cat down, that make Philadelphia what it is. It’s hard to adequately express my love for the place.

 Outside the Emergency-Room entrance to the hospital, a drunken patient stood on the corner, adjusting his untied smock and looking both ways down the street, trying to decide what to do with himself. Inside, a polite security guard told me that the parishioner was over in the other building. He gave me directions and a visitor’s pass that I was to keep visible at all times, even though no one bothered to ask for it.

 Inside the other building, a weird silence took hold. There was no one in the lobby, not even another guard to check my pass, and as I walked through the corridors filled with empty gurneys and spare equipment, the nurses and technicians going the other way said not even a word. I felt like an astronaut in 2001: A Space Odyssey. When I got to the ICU, I stopped a nurse and asked for my parishioner. She told me that they’d transferred him to the building I’d just come from, and gave me new directions.

 I could have been irritated by having to traipse back the way I came, but this is often the way it is when you come to visit in a hospital. Patients rarely stay long in the ICU, and even relatives are a step or two behind the latest room assignment. Besides, going back to the first building gave me the chance to walk across a seventh-floor skyway, which revealed a breath-taking view of the city. For perhaps five or eight blocks in every direction, I could see the snarled, multiple layers of a very old East Coast city. It reminded me of nothing so much as one of those Middle Eastern archeological sites where the professors are uncovered several different levels of civilization at the same time. Two-storied walkups filled with jewelers and bail bondsmen sat beside empty warehouses, gritty, lined apartment buildings and the worn, soulful marble of the Federal Reserve Board and US District Court. It would have taken a lifetime to fully explore the stories left behind like dust on the handrails of just those few blocks, but behind them rose the emerald and gold glass city of downtown Philadelphia. With black storm clouds just past and a bright sun setting behind me, it was a daunting view; it almost dared me to explore it, almost flaunted its precious and accidental beauty.

 I pressed on through the silence and found my parishioner. I didn’t stay long. I don’t know him well at all, and it was the end of a long day for the both of us. So we chatted for a few minutes, he, his wife and I, and then I offered up some prayer and headed home.

 The light from the parking lot attendant’s booth shone bright into the empty lot when I left the hospital. The silence of the hospital seemed to have broken out of the buildings and invaded the surrounding streets. The drunken patient stood quietly on the corner trying to decide what to do with himself; a cop car slid by on the cross street, its lights flashing, taking no notice of the drunk or anyone, the hiss of its tires the only noise.

 I decided to stick to narrow Sansom Street for another few blocks; I felt almost as if I owed it something for the riches it had shown me so far. My loyalty didn’t go un-rewarded either: I passed block after block of impossibly tall, thin, redbrick buildings with bars, coffeeshops, second-hand bookstores on their first floor and apartments above. On one corner, a five-story tall, one-room deep building with a bridal shop on the second floor loomed over its two-story neighbors like an architectural razor. Occasionally, the street would open up into a sudden, gaudy flash of elegance: a sweeping staircase, a new building sticking out like a city slicker amongst the rubes. Then the street would close up again on me and the sad, forgotten world, the empty bars, the empty storefronts, the churches yearning for congregants. By the time I got on the interstate and passed the Art Institute and the Schuykill boathouses all lit up like some new Tivoli, I was sad and nostalgic. Philly is definitely my kind of town—no, it is my town—I belong there, and it to me—by hook or by crook, I’ll get myself a church there someday, which I guess makes this a horror story.


