---
layout: post
title: Good Grief
date: '1999-12-16 05:23:06'
---


No, wait! I didn’t mean it like that! Today’s title—while it is the name of a nationwide grief support network—is only my feeble attempt at tribute to Charles Schulz, who announced the end of his long-running comic strip Peanuts this week. Despite the play on Charlie Brown’s exasperated exclamation, and despite my admitted sadness at seeing Peanuts go, I don’t really want to talk about grief this week. I’ve had enough of that for a while.

A colleague came up to me at a meeting the other day and said, “I understand you enjoy comic books.” That’s true, I said. “Have you ever been to the Comic Book store across from the Amtrak station?” he wanted to know. Oh, yes, I had to say, I’ve dropped many a dollar there. Another colleague standing nearby saw how my eyes lit up at the mention of the words comic books and laughed, shook his head. He knew an addict when he saw one.

 It’s true. As Joey Ramone put it so succinctly, “I am just a comic book guy/I was born on a roller-coaster ride” (it rhymes in the song, honest). It might as well be my motto these days; nearly all the discretionary income that I don’t blow on eating out or new threads goes to comic books. I rarely buy books other than for work these days, and the last time CD I bought was probably Bob Dylan’s “Time Out of Mind,” which I picked up about a year ago. I try to hold myself down to thirty or forty bucks wasted on the bubblegum of art once or twice a month, but sometimes my impulses get the better of me. I mentioned here a couple of weeks ago that I found a new store in Bryn Mawr the other day, which prompted a splurge. And sometimes, I’ll get a few extra bucks from doing a wedding and put that to “good” use. But since I’m already beginning to run out of shelf space after only a year or two of serious collecting, I figure that I need to slow down a bit. At least until I move a bigger bookcase into that room.

*[N.B.: following is a pretty involved discussion of my comic-book tastes, interspersed with at least one or two disgusting stories. If you’re faint of heart, you may want to skip down to the paragraph beginning, “Seriously…”]*

 For my current obsession with the sequential art form, you may thank one William J. Lamberts. Oh, I was into the usual things when I was a kid—Tintin was my first and most enduring love—one of my cats now bears the name of Hergé’s spunky hero. I also adored the classic Marvel series: Thor, Spiderman, the X-Men, the Silver Surfer, the old Combat series, when we could find them. I never did care too much for DC comics, except the very first Batman books, which were hard-boiled in the way that only 30’s and 40’s detective stories could be. And what kid doesn’t love Mad Magazine, whether or not you get the jokes? The only whiff of eccentricity in my tastes were a love for old newspaper comic strips. I’d read just about every panel of *Little Nemo in Dreamland*, *Pogo*, and *Doonesbury* by the time I turned thirteen.

 But by the time I moved to Minnesota after college, I had pretty much forgotten about comic books. When I needed something trashy, brain-dead and fun to read, I’d pick up a rock ‘n’ roll biography, and that would keep my thoughts on ice until the next day. But Bill, my roommate in a miniature apartment just north of the University of Minnesota campus, had a shelf full of comic books, and he was happy to re-introduce my to their pleasures. He also had a trombone under his bed, but that’s another story.

 Now, these were not just any old comic books, you understand, but alternative comic books. Bill’s favorite was *Love and Rockets*, the joint work of the Hernandez brothers, Jaime and Beto. Bill had an original of every issue of the series. When you stop to think that los bros Hernandez put out between four and six issues each year for fourteen years, you realize that was a staggering number of books to be holding onto. Then, when you find out that some issues were worth a couple of hundred dollars apiece, you realize that this was no ordinary collection. But then this was no ordinary comic book.

Those of who have read it will know what a classic it is already. For those of who have never had the good luck to pick up an issue, a brief primer: initially, the stories ran to science fiction or barely disguised porn, or both at the same time. But somewhere in the late 80’s, both brothers took a sharp turn towards social realism. The characters became deeper, the stories became more involving, the satire became sharper and grittier. All the while, the artwork could almost fool you into thinking you were in the same room with the characters. I remember Bill showing me a drawing one day of Maggie, one the main characters, tying her shoes. With its sense of composition and command of human musculature, you’d swear that it had been labored over for weeks by someone looking to hang it in an art gallery somewhere. But no, it was dashed off by a Hispanic punk rocker who’d never taken a life drawing class. Between its hip cultural sensibilities and bravura art, *Love and Rockets* dominated the comic book scene for years.

 There were plenty of other books Bill wanted to show off: Bone, about odd little troll-like characters in a fantasy world, *True Swamp*, concerning the lives of small, neurotic, foul-mouthed forest creatures (I loved it so much I went out and bought every issue I could lay my hands on), *Optic Nerve*, which is now considered the “state-of-the-art” book out there, and assorted other small treasures—F*laming Carrot Top, American Splendor, The Acme Portable Library*. I didn’t need much convincing, and began to collect in a small way on my own. Mostly, I followed Bill’s lead and stuck with the alternative stuff. It all featured good stories and dialogue and art that was somewhere between a cut above and mind-blowing. Hardly a superhero in there, either, except for the wanna-bes in *Love and Rockets*.

 Bill still likes mainly the alternative press, but after a couple of years in Atlanta, I branched out into manga, which are the Japanese serials. The first one I picked up was *Gunsmith Cats* because it seemed so damn weird. Two teenaged bounty hunters—one a gunsmith and expert shot, the other a bomb chucker…oh, never mind. You have to read it to get it. Next I picked up a couple of *Ranma ½*, which again is beyond ordinary mortal comprehension. Let’s just say its main character is a kungfu star who changes from boy to girl when dumped in water. Meanwhile, his dad changes to a panda under similar circumstances, and his main rival becomes an unbelievably cute piglet. Sigh. It’s not easy trying to describe all this without sounding like an idiot, you know. The point is that all of this madness is pulled off with considerable humor and style. It all adds up to (mostly) just good clean fun.

 Once I’d become hooked on manga, there was no turning back. Oh sure, I’m closing in on a complete collection of Tintin books, and I’ll pick up *Corto Maltese* (a seminal French series from the 70’s) or *Zippy Quarterly* (Bill Griffith’s side-splitting cultural observations, which are responsible for the phrase “Are we having fun yet?” by the way) when I get the chance. But once you’ve had Japanese, you can’t go back. These days, I’m hooked on just about anything by Rumiko Takahashi. That leaves a lot of space, since she’s responsible not only for Ranma ½, but also for the long-running romance *Maison Ikkoku*, the fantasy *Inu-Yasha*, and two or three others. They say she turns out a page or two of finished art work every day, which is roughly equivalent to writing about twenty pages of polished prose. Take that, Stephen King!

 Being this obsessed with cultural artifacts is new to me. Those of you who’ve known me and my musical tastes since high school will surely perceive that as something of a whopper, given my fanatical pursuit of records by Gene Vincent and the like. But I stand by my statement: I have reached even more dizzying heights of crazed fixation. I mean, I’m beginning to wonder if I need to invest in the complete Ranma ½ video series. Some kind of sickness is stealing over me. It reminds me of the media assistant at seminary who was a relentless collector of Barbies. “It’s a fetish,” he’d tell you with a grin. “I’ve really gone over the deep end this time.” I found it hard to disagree with, since his desk prominently displayed a Dennis Rodman doll fitted out in its own wedding dress.

 But hey, if this is sickness, I don’t want to be well, baby. I’m having a good time, and it keeps me distracted without the use of artificial stimulants. I used to smoke and booze all the time to release tension; as far as addictions go, comic books are pretty mild.

Seriously, I have been asking myself lately what it is that I get out of comic books or graphic novels. I have to admit that it’s partly just simple distraction. Some people like to watch television; I like to read comic books. It’s also stress relief: when I get home from a meeting at eight or nine o’clock at night, I’m rarely in the mood to read any Dostoevski. I can and do often read the paper, but then what? When it’s time to shut my brain down, or at least to kick it into a lower gear, nothing works quite as well as a good manga. That’s not to say that there is nothing serious going on when I read this stuff: if you’ve ever read Zippy, you’ll know that comic books can be quite highbrow. And if you’ve ever flipped through *Maison Ikkoku* or *Black and White*, you’ll know that the stories can be both involving and actually quite moving at times. In the case of Black and White—a dystopic sci-fi story about two street urchins in a near-future Japanese city—the story and the artwork that expresses it can even be properly called breathtaking. It would be hard to find a piece of art in whatever form—novel, music, sculpture—that is more fully realized.

 But ultimately, my newfound love of comic books rests on one simple premise: it allows me the luxury to dream. Every kid grows up wanting to be someplace else, wanting to see the beauty and the intrigue of the world just around the corner. I think it’s no accident that the best graphic artists are the ones who pay attention to the backgrounds in their pages. Every time I read something by Rumiko Takahashi, I want to pick up and move to Tokyo. Every time I read Tintin—well, if I’d tagged along with him, I’d have gone around the world by now, and been astounded by its landscape everywhere I went. And don’t get me started about George Herriman and *Krazy Kat*. I have this itch to tour Coconino County, and it doesn’t even exist. The point is that comic book artists give us a tremendous gift in the same way that adventure stories do. By giving us the power to imagine an alternative to our day-to-day life, no matter how silly or juvenile, they set free our ability to dream—and desire—a better life for ourselves.

 We outgrow this kind of desire at our peril, for in imagination there is yearning, and in yearning, there is hope—or despair, but you can’t have everything. You might quibble with the particular form of art, but it seems to me that there is something basically human about sparking one’s imagination to build up a fire of hope. Sure, maybe I ought to spend more time with Russian novels and Dutch paintings, but I happen to think my trashy little books give them a run for the money in some ways. And you’ll never laugh at Brueghel the way you laugh at Krazy Kat. Besides which, wouldn’t it be nice to think that humor, imagination and hope are what it’s all about? You can save your reverence and awe for the next guy. I find my ultimate meaning in laughing, dreaming and wishing. After all, that’s why I’m a pastor—a pastor who likes comic books. Are we having fun yet?


