---
layout: post
title: Plug Three
date: '1999-10-07 00:00:00'
---


Shhh…don’t tell anyone. I have a confession to make. Sometimes I feel like a fake. Sometimes I don’t feel like I’m half the minister I ought to be. Too loud, too obnoxious, too secular a boy to be anything more than one of the more confused souls out in the pews. Sometimes, I feel like I don’t deserve the love and respect I get from my girlfriend. Too shy, too nervous, too reluctant to join any club that would have me to collect her kisses and phone calls. Sometimes, I feel just like a big old dumb slob. My house is a mess, my office is buried under a stack of unread mail, and there’s about six serious books piled up on a bookshelf in my spare bedroom waiting for me to crack their covers.

 Now, notice what I’m *not* saying. I’m not saying that I’m not a half-decent pastor, though I do wonder sometimes why my congregation puts up with me. I’m not saying that I don’t deserve my girlfriend, though I don’t. I’m not saying that I am a big old dumb slob, though I really should do the dishes more often. I’m saying that I *feel* like those things are true sometimes. We all feel like a fake some days.

 I’ve begun to accept those feelings as warning signs, indicators that it’s time to do some self-care. When I reach for a pack of Lucky Strikes, I’m working too hard, and need to slow down a bit. When I begin to feel like a fake, I’m thinking too hard, and need to shrug off my worries and try to accept the grace of being who I am. “Don’t just do something—stand there!” goes an old Buddhist saying, and it applies to work and identity in equal measure. At first, it’s hard for a Western-minded idiot like myself to get ahold of such a notion, at least as it relates to being myself. I do just fine with the idea that recreating oneself is not the same as trying to pack every athletic or outdoor adventure possible into a single vacation. I do just fine with sitting still in a chair and letting my body recover. I watch television, and if need be, I’ll watch a fly on the wall. I even went for a walk at the end of a long Sunday this week. Just an easy, mellow walk to stretch my legs and let all the tensions of the day flow out. By the end, I was happy and tired and ready for pizza. Thank you, Jen, for pushing me the extra couple of blocks.

 I haven’t quite gotten the hang of doing the same sort of thing with identity. My parents will tell you that I’ve always been a self-conscious little nut, though if they tell you the way I used to dress in high school, I’ll deny it (think Goodwill suits and strange haircuts). But I’m learning. I am still awkward, but little by little, I’ve discovered ways to accept who I am without any more crutches than an e-mail column.

 But I digress. Grace comes in many packages, big and small, but one of the best forms of grace for someone who feels like a phony is a little baby. I found this out completely by accident the other day, when I drove down to Washington D.C. to see my friends Rob and Aimee, and their beautiful new daughter Celeste. They also have a beautiful old daughter Isabelle, whom I love dearly, and who makes a great older sister. But Isabelle was six months old or more when I first met her, and I have to say, there is nothing quite as captivating as holding a baby who’s a week-and-a-half old. The last time I became so intimately acquainted with a new life was when my niece Ana was born—Lord, ten years ago!—and even then, she had a month or two on her by the time she came to Wisconsin. Still, I fell in love with her from the moment I held her, and to this day, I cherish her like almost no other young child I’ve ever known. Partly, that’s due to the amount of time we spent together before she was quite three; but partly, I believe, it’s due to the young age at which I first encountered her. There’s something about watching a child grow from the very earliest stages that binds them to you. You begin to understand the odds against successful child-rearing even in this day and age, and you give thanks that you have been able to watch the exception grow.

 Celeste was born ten days before I met her, and, I noticed, still had her navel plug in. Her skin was still a deep pinkish purple color. When I held her, I had to support her carefully: her neck muscles had not fully developed, and she would have flopped around like a rag doll without a hand behind her head. Most amazing of all was her chest. I could feel her ribs on my arm, and her little lungs working hard. She felt hollow, like a bird. Yet, undeniably, she was somehow full, too, with life and spirit. I fancied that it was her soul that I could detect behind her ribcage, and now that I stop to think about it, I wonder if so much of our spiritual problems don’t stem from us forgetting that presence within us. We begin to mistake it for an empty tummy, and so our troubles begin.

 Obviously, meeting Celeste made quite an impression on me. Rob, Aimee, you now have two wonderful little girls, and if you don’t stop there, my friends Norm and Mary in Minnesota will begin to get jealous. But before you dismiss me as a gushing dolt, hear me out. There’s more to this than the transparent joy of a brand-new baby.

 Or is there? I had an overwhelming sense while holding Isabelle, or while watching her mom take care of her, that this was real, this was what it was all about. It’s nothing that hasn’t been said before, but it made sense to me in an entirely new way. I’ve been told that we are genetically programmed to go ga-ga when a baby responds to our caretaking—babies stay alive, in some ways, by being so infernally cute that we’ll go out of our way to meet their needs. I feel that way about my cats, too, but nothing like what happens when I pick up a new baby. There is a joy in seeing a new, human, life that goes beyond simple Darwinism. I’d like to think that it is a reaction to the beauty of God’s creation. Perhaps it’s magnified by being a baby rather than a mountain or a newborn lamb, but it’s stunning in its own right, and justifiably so.

 Well, I’ll let scientists argue over whether there’s anything more to that moment than evolutionary instinct. The corker for me—the thing that makes a baby special and the whole reason I bring the subject up in the first place—is that holding a new kid in your lap has a way of making you want to be a better person. When I held Celeste, and saw her blue eyes looking out at the world in wonder, I felt it necessary that I should go back to Pennsylvania and become the best pastor, and best person, I knew how. I have no parental responsibility for this child; I’m not even a godfather to her. And yet, I felt like taking a deep breath and going back to work on her behalf. Babies relativize the world for you, remind you that it’s not all about you and your own worries. Again, nothing that hasn’t been said before.

 But what hasn’t been said before is that babies take care of the faker inside you. I don’t mean that they can make less of a liar of you. We all know mendacious souls who have gone on their dishonest way merrily unimpeded by the example they set for their children. But babies do make more of a person out of you. In doing nothing more than forcing you to stop, giggle, coo, and generally make an ass of yourself in entertaining (not mention caring for) them, babies bring out the human side in us all. And in making us more human, they make us more worthy of all the things we think we don’t deserve: call, love, excuse not to do the dishes tonight. If that’s not real, and not grace, I don’t know what is. You can tell anyone you like about that.


