---
layout: post
title: Snot Boy
date: '1999-10-14 00:00:00'
---


My mother likes to tell my brothers and I that we are descended from “moody Danes.” Her most immediate reference is to our propensity for depression and melancholy, but there are other reasons as well. Until recently, we were all bachelors, for example. If we were only farmers, we would fit in perfectly with our old-world Lutheran heritage. We all take after our Danish ancestors physically, as well. Peter looks the most like our Danish grandfather, but we all are tall and stocky, our skin is fair, and our hair runs from a strawberry blond to a light brown. We are all serious thinkers in our own way. I suppose I am the most philosophical, but the others are sober, contemplative men in their own right. None of us are particularly good at talking to women we don’t know, which is the mark of a good Scandinavian man wherever in the world he might be found. Well, all right, Jon has always been a bit of a charmer, but I think he inherited that from the tiny sliver of Irish ancestry remaining in our blood.

 As for me, the Dane comes out in its own peculiar ways. As I said, I like philosophy and theology, and I’ve always had the compulsiveness needed to be a true Faustian scholar. (Dr. Faustus studied twenty hours a day in his little cubby, and sold his soul to the devil because he was too much of a geek to approach Margarit on his own.) I’ve even gone so far as to work my way through a fair chunk of Luther, Nietzsche, and Reinhold Niebuhr, even a little Kierkegaard. Perhaps I’m more German than Scandinavian, then, but Germans are moody enough as it is. They’ll do for other reasons, too, as we shall soon discover.

 Another example: I’ve always liked cloudy, gloomy days. They remind me of Wisconsin, for one thing, which is about as close to northern Germany and Scandinavia as you’re likely to find in the United States. I detested the long cloudless stretches we had in Atlanta, and considered the hot, muggy southern summer days unfit for human inhabitation. The first year I was there, we had a protracted drought and accompanying heat wave, and I thought I’d died and gone to hell. I expected little devils to pop up out of the heat ripples on the street at any moment. I was much more comfortable my second year, when a stagnant pattern of rain and low temperatures settled in over the Southeast. The daily high never rose over 75 for weeks on end, and I was in hog heaven. This was about the point when my classmates began to give me up for crazy. The last year I was in Atlanta, I lived in a house mostly without air-conditioning—we could cool the upstairs and do an imperfect job with the living room. It felt like I’d been hosed down and then left to dry out in the mouth of a crocodile. Even this summer in Lancaster, with another drought and another heat wave, was better than suffering in Atlanta. At least here a fan turned on you did some good. In Georgia, about all a fan is good for without air-conditioning to provide heavy artillery behind it is to move dust from one side of the room to the other. A crocodile’s armpit is cooler.

 I also like rainy weather because it encourages indoor activity. I’m a natural slug, and having an excuse like heavy rain to stay indoors and read is worth its weight in ice cream to me. How else did you expect me to make it through the collected works of Reinhold Niebuhr?

 When I was searching for my first church at the beginning of this year, I received a profile from a church in Forks, Washington, on the Olympia peninsula. They listed the positive attributes of their community as “rain, good people, more rain, fishing, hiking, nature, laughter, and more rain!”. I looked Forks up in an atlas and discovered that they receive between 200 and 300 inches of rain a year. Another town just up the coast gets over 300 and bills itself as “the wettest place in the U.S.” I had already accepted my present job when the head of the search committee called me up. She said she’d noticed that my interests were “cooking, reading and playing with the cats,” which she took as a positive because there was so much rain, outdoor hobbies were rather cramped. I didn’t regret passing up the interview until July, when the thermometer in Lancaster hit 100 for the tenth day in a row, and the drought entered its third month. I looked in the paper and saw that the predicted high on the Olympic peninsula was 60, and the local weathermen were calling for—you guessed it—rain. It set my teeth on edge for a moment, it did. Then I realized that was a typical summer day in Forks, and decided it was possible to have too much of a good thing.

 As much as I have liked cloudy days, though—there is something to be said for a good overcast day after surviving the merciless blue skies of a drought—I have come to detest them in equal measure. Or rather, I have begun to detest their arrival.

 My nose, you see, my great Scandihoovian schnozz, turns out to be an infallible predictor of a change in the weather. Every time the humidity level changes, every time the temperature rises or falls quickly, and I’m flat out on my back, sinuses flaring, eyes watering, nose running to beat a Nigerian marathoner. There seems to be some evil combination of temperature and humidity that sets me off—explaining the equation exactly would probably take some research in higher mathematics—but in broad strokes, it’s easy enough to understand. An approaching storm, particularly one with a cold front behind it, will incapacitate me as surely as a landmine. A regular old thunderstorm, even one that sweeps through miles away, will set me honking like a flock of Canada geese. So will a breezy day or too much time spent in front of a fan. But the worst effects almost always come from a storm on its way in. No bloodhound could smell out approaching weather better than me. I’ve gone into airlocked highrises of a dry and lovely morning, only to have my nostrils go off at noon like an atomic bomb. No sooner do I look out the window when I see a band of wet-looking clouds infiltrating the neighborhood.

 I maintain that this preternatural ability to sniff out trouble on its way in is a result of my Danish heritage. Well, come to think of it, the other two profoundly allergic sufferers I can think of in my family are my uncle and my father, both of whom are mostly German. But northern European, close enough. Have you ever known an Italian to be laid low by his or her nose? (I can think of only one, but by her own admission, she’s three-quarters German. She’s only Italian by dint of her last name and one other attribute which I dare not name for fear of my life.) Allergies and moodiness go together hand-in-hand, recent studies have concluded, which stands to reason. Wouldn’t you be prone to depression if your head leaked like a faucet? And wouldn’t you be a little, well, snotty, if your head felt like it was going to burst? Proud Scandinavian heritage, indeed! All it’s ever given me is a weakness for beer and chocolate, and a symbiotic relationship with tissue makers.

 My family will no doubt be quick to point out that this has been a life-long affliction for me. Ever since I entered my teens, my sinus cavities have waged war on me. Even there is evidence that this is somehow linked to my family background. Who was ever more aggressive on the European continent than the Germans? But it is true that I have been living with this for many years. At first, we thought it might be the dust that built up in my room. But given that my slovenly habits haven’t changed a whit since high school, I’m ready to rule that possibility out. If dust were the culprit, I’d be dead by now. Likewise evergreen pollen. It’s true that catching a face full of the horrid yellow powder given off by pine trees as they broadcast their attempt to reproduce isn’t exactly conducive to nasal health. But even in the middle of two different cities, where pine trees were blocks away, I have been laid low. I also used to think that it was mold, particularly when I lived in Atlanta, where germs will grow on the bottom of your shoes if you stand still too long. My second apartment there had a poor seal between the walls and the foundations, and heavens knew what was multiplying between our carpet and the cement floor. Things eased up when I moved to an upstairs apartment, but I still suffered more than any righteous man should. So now I’ve got it in my head that it must be temperature and humidity, those being the only common factors I can dope out in all the places I’ve lived.

 My pals John, Rob and Charles, as sarcastic and witty bastards as ever lived, used to be similarly afflicted. Because of that, I am tempted to draw a causal relationship between what comes out of your nose and what comes out of your mouth. Snot comes out here, and here…But then I remember that we had other chums in common who were just as sparkling in their humor, yet nowhere near as beset with nasal problems. I am ashamed to say that I can’t remember the state of our friend David’s nose, even as many times as I felt like poking it for some shot he took at me.

 Still, our chronic sinusitis occasioned some good humor. Once, allergies and a long-lived cold caused me a sinus infection. To ease the cough that came with it, a doctor prescribed a course of codeine-laced cough syrup. I felt miserable at the time, and only wanted to go to bed and die in peace.

So I would stagger out into the kitchen at about nine o’clock in my pj’s, take a hit of the magic elixir, and then stagger back to my room to collapse and dream prolifically. At the time, I also had the habit of ordering oatmeal at breakfast, and between that, the pajamas, and my naturally sweet disposition, my buddies took to calling me “Grandpa.”

 The coughing was always the worst in the morning, when the syrup had worn off a little. One morning, I was using the head while Rob took a shower, and particularly nasty paroxysm took hold.

 “You all right out there, Grandpa?” he asked as he rinsed.

 “Grandpa needs his shot of junk, Robby” I rasped out. Rob almost fell out of the tub, he was laughing so hard. The joke was the topic of much college-boy conversation, and even preceded me to Macalester College in St. Paul, where I was introduced as the “original grandpa” to many of Dave’s friends.

 Charles also brought off a few fine zingers on the topic. He was found of walking around the apartment with a kleenex shoved up either nostril, for one thing. Between that and his penchant for building a Carmen-Mirandesque turban out of his bath towel, he was quite a sight to behold. He demanded to be taken seriously in this get-up, which only made the giggling that much more uncontrollable. He was also found of singing in German, alternately that his head was a giant snot-pudding, and that it was a giant snot-cheese. Even to this day, all you have to do is mention the word “snotkaisen,” and my mind reels back instantly to Charles and his kleenex. More proof, as if any was needed, that humor can be found in the oddest of places. And that apartment on Kendall Avenue was a very odd place…

 Well, I didn’t set out to waste my afternoon on this business, but once you get going, it’s hard to stop. At least not without some medication.

(Rimshot, please!) I’ll at least attempt to redeem this column by putting forth the long-shot notion that snot does have its serious side. I once preached on Paul’s famous “thorn in the side,” and only by the grace of God did I go off on the effect traffic has on the average commuter than what an affliction allergies can be. Not even the most adventurous of exegetes would care to argue that Paul would have been a lot better off if he’d stayed away from ragweed and pollen, and taken the occasional Benadryl. But, like Paul, I will argue that having an ongoing irritant does something for the soul. It imposes limits, for one thing. I know that were it not for allergies, I’d probably spend even more time in my office not taking care of myself. And were it not for sinus trouble, I’d probably be even more unbearable than I am now. Hard to believe, isn’t it?


