---
layout: post
title: The Word for the Week
date: '2010-08-09 14:46:00'
---


[Exodus 18:13-27](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=148365117)

A week or two ago, I spoke about how we can (or should) find God in the everyday activity of our life. Today we’re going to talk about the most everyday activity, the most mundane, day-to-day stuff you can imagine: bureaucracy.

Moses has a problem. He is spending all his time arbitrating the pesky little details of the people and making decisions for them. He does this, he says, because he is giving the people oracles from God—visions revealing God’s will—and teaching them *torah*, God’s law. Trouble is, he’s trying to do it all by himself. It’s wearing him out, and the people are beginning to get agitated because they’re spending all day waiting to see Moses.

It’s not clear from the text if Moses gets himself into this position because he hasn’t had a chance to think about what he’s doing, or if he just doesn’t have the common sense God gave him. Whatever the case, he’s a lousy administrator.  
[]()

Fortunately, his father-in-law Jethro has some wisdom to share. He proposes a simple solution: Moses, delegate. Train some other people to be judges, and you go do what you’re best at, the visionary thing. The difficult cases can be appealed up to Moses, and he can take the truly tough ones up to God. It gives Moses a break, and lets the people live in peace. Which is to say, shalom: the peace that comes from the right ordering of God’s creation. Indeed, Moses accepts the proposition, everybody’s happy, and Jethro goes home, never to be heard from again.

So there’s the passage in a nutshell. There are several things worth noting about it:

1. There is a concern for justice as a constituting part of Israelite society. What I mean is that having been freed from economic oppression under Pharaoh, they’re not about to go back to a way of life that involves cheating, stealing, or otherwise ripping one another off. The important qualification for the judges is that they be “trustworthy men who hate dishonest gain,” that is financial gain gotten through violence, fraud, or perjury. We’ll hear more about what “justice” means to the Israelites next week, when we talk about the Ten Commandments.
2. God blesses impartial justice, and more broadly government, as good. Judges will rule over Israel for many years, until they become corrupt and untrustworthy. The Israelites cry out for a king, God tells them “you’ll be sorry,” but when they insist, they get King Saul. They were sorry. But the point is that God provides ways for people to solve problems for themselves, creatively and imaginatively, and that includes government. It’s not just a matter of figuring out God’s unchanging law and laying it down, either. If you follow the history in the Old Testament, you find that the judges are constantly interpreting and, yes, changing the law. God’s flexible, and so should we be. (To take a tangent for a moment here, while we we’re speaking of courts, you may have heard that a federal judge this week invalidated Proposition 8, the California law barring same-sex marriage. Whatever you may think about that decision, you should refrain from calling it “ungodly.” Courts are no less a part of God’s providence for making decisions we disagree with. As well, you should know that this case probably will get appealed all the way up to the Supreme Court. I am not a lawyer, much less a Supreme Court justice, but I can’t see any way that it will be overturned on appeal, unless the justices decide to call black white and vice versa. Which means that you all should prepare yourself for the very real possibility that within a few years, same-sex marriage will be legal across the United States.)
3. More generally, God blesses creative and imaginative problem-solving. If some theologians are right, God’s natural role is leading us into the future, in large part by helping us to imagine that future, and equipping us to reach out to grasp it. As we’ve said before, God leads his people out of those places where they seem stuck, giving them hope for a new and better future, and then graciously fulfilling his promises to them in surprising ways. In keeping with the theme of God’s presence in the ordinary, this doesn’t have to be some huge divine intervention or revelation. Applying commonsense problem-solving is enough. Nor does it have to be somehow “divine” or “holy.” This is what we might call the “fix the roof” principle: if the church roof needs to be fixed, you fix it. There’s not really a special Christian or Biblical way to do that.

It’s there that I want to take leave of the “noticing” and move into the “applying” portion of today’s sermon. Again as you may have heard, Ann Marie Schultz has decided to step down as the leader of the Christian Education committee. We are grateful for her service and wish her well as she seeks to further her own education.

But this leaves us in a quandary not unlike Moses’, and not just because administration is, ahem, not my strong suit. The question becomes, how do we share the very important task of leading Christian Education in our church? That question very quickly turns into another one, which is, how is the best way to do Christian Education in our church? What is the best way to pass on our values and help one another to sense and understand the presence of God in our midst? Because we don’t want to wind up in Moses’ shoes, being completely overwhelmed because we can’t take the time to think through what we’re doing.

So I’m asking that we put together a group to come up with some ideas for how to do Christian Ed, and who might be the best person (or persons) to lead the program. Whatever creative, imaginative suggestion they come up with will be just fine, I’m sure. If it isn’t, well, God can roll with the punches, and so should we.

However, I have asked that whatever group we put together carry out their mission with a special emphasis on discerning God’s presence among us, and I will be giving the same challenge to the Consistory on Tuesday night. I think it is time for our leaders to begin to exercise spiritual leadership, which is more than just saying “this is what I think God wants us to do.” It’s leading in a way that gives people the sense that their life has meaning and makes a difference, and leading in a way that uses core values in whatever we do, so that people feel connected, cared for, and appreciated, but also so they grow in their ability to care for other people. We need to teach our children to do this, but we also need to teach ourselves to do it, over and over again.

Because when you really get down to it, spiritual leadership is what this lesson is about in a couple of ways. Moses is attempting to bring God’s presence into the midst of this new society forming in the wilderness. He’s trying to show them how the Lord is with them even in the most mundane activities. But he’s not doing a very good job of it. With a simple fix, he is able to concentrate on articulating the core values of the community, while they grow in their ability to care for one another, and indeed, so that they can begin to feel like their lives have meaning and make a difference.

That’s where we’re at. You deserve to feel connected, cared for, and appreciated. You deserve to feel like your life has meaning and makes a difference in the world. You deserve to grow in your ability to care for other people. I’ll have enough ego to say that the analogy breaks down a bit because I have a little more common sense when it comes to administration than Moses seems to have had, but collectively, we’re all waiting for a Jethro to show up and make the suggestion that’s going to put us in a state of *shalom*. Let us pray in thanksgiving to God who gives us common sense that that moment comes quickly, and we are prepared to accept the suggestion when it comes. Amen.


