---
layout: post
title: The Surprises of San Diego [personal]
date: '2012-01-15 19:40:00'
---


*A long time ago, before I started writing about man and God and law, “A Pastor’s Notebook” was an outlet for my essays, often humorous, usually long, occasionally smart. After every distraction imaginable and then some, I seem to be ready to resume the tradition. The following is part one of a two-part essay centered on some of my former preoccupations: traveling and food. It’s supposed to be funny.*

No, I don’t care if you don’t think it’s not funny.

Because this is so long, I recommend printing it out for review. Stay tuned for part two next week or the week after.

[]()

I have always believed that the man who travels on his stomach travels the best. Yet of all the pleasures of our latest vacation—and there were many—the ones that could be digested took the hindmost.

Before we get to the blue ribbons, however, let’s talk about those culinary adventures. We must not disappoint the audience. Leaving them hungry seems like not such a good idea either.

Almost the first thing we did in San Diego, after picking up the rental car and dropping off our bags at the hotel, was to head north for dinner at the [Stone Brewery in Escondido](http://www.stoneworldbistro.com/). This might seem a bit odd, as we got in at 2:30 in the afternoon, and I will allow that stopping at the hotel wasn’t the most efficient use of time. But allowances must be made for human frailties like needing to freshen up after eight hours in various tin cans and airplanes besides, so no, we did not head out directly from the airport. Besides that, my son Bill had spilled a complementary beverage on his lap and needed new or at least less sticky pants. Besides that, you get a free Road Warrior pin from AAA for driving in Southern California rush hours, which as I understand it, begin about 3:00 in the afternoon and end around 10 or 11 the next morning, when the commuters get sick of driving north and try the freeways south for a change. In fact, according to my friends, houses in SoCal are purchased strictly for investment and to keep the coyotes well-supplied with snacks, the theory being that if you throw them the odd dog or cat, it will suppress their taste for human flesh temporarily. Citizens eat, sleep and drink chai lattes in their cars. They also work from them, offices being mostly decorative as well and strictly for chumps without cellphones. Occasionally the commuters will drop a kid off at swim lessons or soccer matches. It remains unclear whether these children actually belong to the car in question. They’re just passed along as a public service as mandated by Prop 6-and-under.

Anyway, about those coyotes. Stone Brewery is off the beaten path, which in So Cal means it’s tucked away in a canyon surrounded by scrub brush and anonymous, mirrored office complexes. (Since no one ever actually reaches their office, they don’t waste valuable commuting time on making them distinguishable from one another.) The brewery and restaurant are further obscured by a lack of a sign or any other identifying characteristic. In Milwaukee, you’d be required to have a beer keg lit up in neon, or at the very least an enormous sign with a fat, mulleted man belching out the appropriate product. Stone Brewery, by contrast, looks for all the world like a laundry surrounded by dirt-bike trails. We drove past it to the end of the road, and I was convinced that we would be lost forever, or at least until the coyotes got hungry.

I am trying and failing to tell you about the gustatory pleasures of the place, which were considerable. We started with a beer sampler and pretzels, which by some sort of witchcraft had been coaxed into being crisp and chewy on the outside and spongy on the inside, like a good sourdough. I plan trying to duplicate the experience as soon as possible. If you haven’t heard from me by 2013, check my basement. I may have installed an oven down there run by one of those [electrical generators you see in Dr. Frankenstein’s laboratory](http://www.steltercreativewoodworks.com/STELTER1/Frankenstein_L/IMAG0009.JPG). Stone’s beer was very good, but I am happy to report that it did not trump Milwaukee’s [Sprecher brewery](http://www.sprecherbrewery.com/index.php), so I can continue to tout the home team.[<sup>1</sup>](http://danstestkitchencom.netfirms.com/wordpress2/2012/01/surprises-of-san-diego-personal.html#1) However, I made the mistake of having a Belgian-made chocolate cherry stout for my second round. Then I made the mistake of looking at the [six pages of mostly Belgian brews](http://www.stoneworldbistro.com/beer/bottles.asp) they offer. [<sup>2</sup>](http://danstestkitchencom.netfirms.com/wordpress2/2012/01/surprises-of-san-diego-personal.html#2) Being called a Walloon would be a small price to pay for regular exposure to this nectar of the gods. I suppose I will have to settle for visiting Stone each time I’m in SoCal. Each time. Every time. Are we clear on this?

After much agonizing, I settled on duck BBQ tacos for dinner, which were great, if a bit greasy. Duck always is. Jen got chicken yakisoba, which was similarly great. I wondered shamelessly if I were missing anything by not ordering the tempura shepherd’s pie, and was contemplating choking down a second dinner strictly for research purposes when my friend Pat pulled perhaps the cruelest trick he’s ever played on fellow clergy: *he gave me the last slice of his artisinal sausage plate*. You would think this was an act of great generosity. No. It was pure evil. It is a little-known fact that manna or the “bread of life” was not bread at all but sausage. When the crowds implore Jesus to “give us this bread always,” the word is actually “bratwurst” in the original Aramaic. *That’s* what this stuff tasted like, and now I will have to wait until I reach the Pearly Gates before I taste it again. I understand you’re presented with a bowl full of them immediately upon arrival. Don’t worry: kosher doesn’t apply up yonder. The sausage was so good that I burst out with the exclamation, “I have made a terrible, terrible mistake—and I made no mistake at all!” I seldom do when it comes to dinner.

I admit frankly that I got beat on dessert, however. My orange chiffon cheesecake was pretty good, even if it did come with slices of blood orange for garnish. Jen had a rather pedestrian peach cobbler, which was partially redeemed by a scoop of vanilla ice cream from [Niederfrank’s](http://www.niederfranks.com/) down in National City, near the Mexican border. But our friend Barbara’s “deconstructed black forest cake,” served in a miniature Mason jar, was out of this world. I almost would have traded my chocolate cherry stout for it. Oh, who the hell am I kidding? I would have had it along with the beer and been a very happy man.

We consumed all of this on the patio of a reinterpreted beer garden. Clusters of tables surrounded fire pits and a koi pond. A short stroll down the path took you to a picnic area and a frog pond. Sadly, the frogs were hibernating, but the enormous, ancient koi looked as hungry as us. We made sure to keep Bill’s fingers away from the water.

Given what I’ve said so far, it would be tempting to conclude that Southern California cuisine is owned by angel-haired hipsters desperate to reinvent every dining experience they could, except amped-up and more expensive. It is the kind of place where where restaurants are proud to let you know about their hummus of the day, or that their fish tacos aren’t made with just any old Long John Silver’s leftovers, like those guys down the street.

But SoCal also provides surprisingly good eats on the other end of the scale. I do believe I’d take an [In ‘N’ Out](http://www.innout.com/) cheeseburger over just about any gourmet concoction, and I’ve had a soy-and-black-bean patty that would make you swear some poor beast gave up its life for you willingly that very morning. Their shakes may not be the best I’ve ever had—many non-chain-based restaurants will serve up real milk-based shakes and the [Friendly’s Fribble](http://www.friendlys.com/menu/dessert/fountain-beverages/) will always have a place near and dear to my heart—but the ones from In ‘N’ Out are deeply, thickly, wondrously satisfying. I mourn that we only found out after our visit that you can ask for one Neapolitan-style. That seems like an innovation second only to waffles and ice cream in the blessing of its rich goodness.

After a long day touring the zoo—I have seen the wombat, [<sup>3</sup>](http://danstestkitchencom.netfirms.com/wordpress2/2012/01/surprises-of-san-diego-personal.html#3) and I am a changed man—we shlepped down to [San Diego’s Little Italy](http://www.littleitalysd.com/) for dinner. Here the surprises really took hold. It’s a crowded neighborhood, for one thing, and on Saturday, it’s hard to find a parking spot in it. We must have circled for fifteen minutes, only to be vexed by mailboxes, loading zones, and other annoyances. We finally thought we had one in front of some electrical boxes, only to discover on stepping out of the car two yellow poles warning us away. At that point, I was ready to throw up my hands and drive away. But just then Jen spotted another couple pulling away from the curb on the other side of the street. With a little fancy driving on her part, and a little bit of assistance on my part, we wiggled into it, and were set for the night. I wouldn’t say I blocked any other cars from taking the spot. I just jaywalked slowly so they didn’t have the chance. The gambit payed off as we walked down the street to find a restaurant. I glanced up the hill to see a long line of altar servers and a crucifer processing up the street before a Catholic priest. They moved without a sound as the bells of [Our Lady of the Rosary](http://www.olrsd.org/) summoned the faithful to the 5:30 mass.

We turned our attention away and Jen began to explain to the boy that the planes came in low over the buildings to land at nearby Lindbergh International. No sooner had the words come out of her mouth than one screamed overhead.

“Mama! I see one!” Bill shouted, overcome by the surprise. He actually jumped a foot off the ground as he yelled. We laughed and laughed.

Then for the next three days, he ruined the joke by repeating it every time he saw a plane. This is the way of the eight-year-old. Jokes must be repeated until they have been driven into the ground. This is a sacred code no less binding than that of the Samurai.

There were plenty of self-proclaimed trattoria and cafes to choose from along ___ Street. Mercifully, no one thought to inflict a “Luigi’s: A Pasta and Tomato Sauce Restaurant” on us. But the place that caught our eye was [Filippi’s Pizza Grotto](http://www.realcheesepizza.com/), which turns out to be a fairly accurate description. The dining area is dimly lit, festooned with empty chianti bottles decorated by their guzzlers, and quite possibly has not been updated since “Three’s Company” went off the air. [<sup>4</sup>](http://danstestkitchencom.netfirms.com/wordpress2/2012/01/surprises-of-san-diego-personal.html#4) I do believe they’ll wear the carpeting out, then replace it with second-hand linoleum before they redecorate anything. A sign in the front declares, “Someone once told us: ‘This place is frozen in time.’ We mean to keep it that way!” They do, too.

But getting back to the dining area is an adventure in itself. You queue up through a hieratically reduced deli: there is only one aisle and a single, lonesome nook filled with pasta, bounded on the other side by a large meat counter. The cramped quarters make it almost impossible to get down to the hostess’ station, so she comes to you with a clipboard, asking for a name and the number in your party. When we came in, the line was 14 or 15 deep. I asked a pleasant Japanese family in front of us if the wait was worthwhile. “I think so,” the daughter said, “but my tastes and yours might not be the same.” Her father was more definite: “It is!” he boomed. “It is worth the wait!”

When it comes to food, father usually knows best,[<sup>5</sup>](http://danstestkitchencom.netfirms.com/wordpress2/2012/01/surprises-of-san-diego-personal.html#5) and so it was in this case. We started with deep salad bowls piled high with lettuce, greens, chick peas, pinto beans and banana peppers. Our waitress brought me a beer that may or may not have been the best amber bock I’ve ever had but was certainly the most welcome. After five hours standing around with koalas, pandas, big cats, wombats, my son, and other forms of wildlife, just about anything cold and taste-filled would have done the trick.

Honestly, I could have made the pizza crust myself, but had I been able to reach the deli counter rather than wave fondly at it on our way out the door, I would have begged, borrowed, or stolen a can of their sauce. I am going to wake up in a cold sweat dreaming of that sauce some night. It only took a slice-and-a-half to fill us up, the mark of a good pizza. I’m surprised I even noticed the sauce. An archeologist could happily spend an entire field season burrowing down under successive cheese layers in search of that sauce. In fact, I would be willing to lead a National Geographic expedition to do just that, assuming I can rope Sprecher into being the corporate sponsor.

I had asked our waitress Stella—no I am not kidding—about the sauce. She sidled up to the table to urge a cannoli on us for dessert. Leaning over to me, she said with a twinkle in her eye, “Ask for Tony at the meat counter on your way out. No, I am not kidding.”

I just laughed. “Which one?” Jen explained that her father’s family was chock-full of Tonys and Phils, after the Italian custom of naming the first son for the grandfather.

It broke my heart to be cut off from the meat counter by a line of tourists at least forty deep as we left. Well, that and not having room for a cannoli. Out on the sidewalk, a Russian woman was selling roses for a dollar a stem. Every time I turned around she wanted to know if I wanted one. I didn’t, but someone had bought some for their daughters. One of them, four or six years old, was literally bouncing up and down with the pleasure of having one. A plane roared overhead.

“Look Mama!” Bill yelled. “I saw one!”

[<sup>1</sup>]()I am still angling for a free case of Sprecher for my work in advertising. Have I mentioned how good their Octoberfest is?

[<sup>2</sup>]()I am told there is no prize for working your way through their list. A new liver would be a good start.

[<sup>3</sup>]()We’ll come back to him.

[<sup>4</sup>]()You have the theme song running through your head now, don’t you? You’re welcome.

[<sup>5</sup>]()This may be the *only* time when Father knows best.


