---
layout: post
title: Blessing of the Empty Crib
date: '2012-12-18 19:32:00'
---


<div><span>*The following blessing was inspired by a Catholic children’s liturgy for blessing a nativity set before Christmas, the idea of which I have obviously adapted to the current situation. It might be especially appropriate for the first week of Advent, when we hear Jeremiah, on Holy Innocents’ Day or at Epiphany.*</span></div><div><span>*  
*</span></div><div><span>*It can be used with a manger taken from a nativity set, with an actual crib, or with some other representation of a child’s bed.*</span>  
<span>*  
*</span><span>*You can find a .pdf-formatted version of this liturgy [here](https://www.dropbox.com/s/k8wf53q98cqzi4h/Blessing%20of%20the%20Empty%20Crib.pdf).*</span></div><div><span>  
</span></div><div><span>God our Father, who longs to gather us</span></div><div><span>     as a hen shelters her brood beneath her wings:</span></div><div><span>You have heard the voice of Rachel</span></div><div><span><span></span>     weeping for her children, who are no more.</span></div><div><span>You have heard the cries and lamentations</span></div><div><span><span></span>     of the parents of Bethlehem</span></div><div><span><span></span>     when their sons were sacrificed for Herod’s power.</span></div><div><span>You shared with Mary in the loss</span></div><div><span><span></span>     of a Son taken away far too young,</span></div><div><span><span></span>     and you know the sword-pierced heart of every grieving parent.</span></div><div><span></span></div><div><span>Lord our God, you have promised to wipe away every tear from our eyes</span></div><div><span><span></span>     when your Son, our Lord, takes the heavenly throne</span></div><div><span><span></span>     to become our Lamb and Shepherd.</span></div><div><span></span></div><div><span>Renew now that promise as we contemplate the emptiness of this crib</span></div><div><span><span></span>     and look to a future when it is filled, and Christ our Emmanuel</span></div><div><span><span></span>     is with us once more.</span></div><div><span></span></div><div><span>Comfort the mothers and fathers of all children who have died,</span></div><div><span><span></span>     including … *(children lost to the congregation may be named here)*</span></div><div><span><span></span>     and especially those children lost to violence: *(children may be named here, as appropriate).*</span></div><div><span>Dry the tears of their parents and enfold them in your surrounding love.</span></div><div><span></span></div><div><span>Bless + this crib that their loss may not be forgotten,</span></div><div><span><span></span>     and that it might be a symbol of the life that is to come.</span></div><div><span></span></div><div><span>For we that look upon it now, may it be a reminder</span></div><div><span><span></span>     that as Pharaoh’s daughter plucked Moses from the Nile,</span></div><div><span><span></span>     so too we have an obligation to seek life for the children of …</span></div><div><span><span></span>     and for all children everywhere.</span></div><div><span></span></div><div><span>May this nurturing shelter cause us to welcome with gratitude any child in need,</span></div><div><span><span></span>     guide us to stand shoulder to shoulder with those who mourn,</span></div><div><span><span></span>     open us to their pain, and</span></div><div><span><span></span>     provoke us to imagine a better, more peaceful world. </span></div><div><span>Through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit may we be moved to create</span></div><div><span><span></span>     that world in good and active service.</span></div><div><span></span></div><div><span>We pray these things to you in the name of Jesus, rightful owner of this bed,</span></div><div><span><span></span>     who, with the Holy Spirit, lives and reigns with you,</span></div><div><span><span></span>     one God, now and forever. **Amen.**</span></div><div><span></span></div><div><span>Matthew 22:37/Luke 13:24; Jeremiah 31:15; Luke 2:35; Revelation 7:17; Exodus 2:5-10</span></div>
