---
layout: post
title: Rejoice
date: '2012-12-16 14:42:00'
---


Today is [*Gaudete Sunday,*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaudete_Sunday) the day when Christians rejoice, remembering that Christ will come again at the end of time. It may seem like a sick joke to proclaim such a day this soon after the events at Sandy Hook. It will particularly seem that way to our secular friends whose views of faith have been soured by exposure to conservative God representatives eager to lay blame for the most recent tragedy, whatever it might be.

We may be reluctant, then, to say with [Zephaniah](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=222703974)

> Sing aloud, O daughter Zion; shout, O Israel! Rejoice and exult with all your heart…!

A more natural reaction would be to declare a national day of mourning. We will have that soon enough, as the bodies of the victims are laid to rest.

Today, though, we rejoice. Not because we *must*, but because we *can.* As we do so, we also ought to offer a word of explanation for this joy: what is its source? What justifies it in the face of such sorrow? What does it have to say to those who don’t share our beliefs?

First, let us understand the scope of the problem. After the shootings in Oak Creek, I told my congregation something that seems worth repeating here:

> What causes these shootings, more than anything, is a terrible loneliness. These shooters come to believe that no one understands them, no one cares about them, and no one looks out for their interests. They become resentful of a world they perceive as cold and unjust, and the resentment and the bitterness just builds higher and higher until it explodes at the cost of those they blame for their misfortune. It is not an accident that many, if not most, of them have some loss of a job or a relationship that seems to spark them into action. Their thought seems to be that when you’ve lost it all, you might as well take a few with you.

It also seems to be the case that the killers express their resentment by taking away what others find valuable: the lives of those who are dear to them, the sense of safety itself. Mass killers don’t go to public places just because that’s where the people are. They go because they know they can complicate our sense of school or church or mall or any other place people gather. They know they can continue to hurt after death when the living are afraid to come together.

But the Christian proclamation of joy is not for time when everything’s groovy. It is for the dark days, precisely for when sickness, suffering and evil threaten to overwhelm. It is a declaration in the teeth of these things that [“all shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of thing shall be well.”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julian_of_Norwich) It is a claim, in other words, to a deeper, counter-cultural reality.

What justification can Christians give for such an assertion? We may be tempted to say that our God is bigger and stronger than any pain that can be inflicted in the world. Generally, this argument follows two lines of reasoning. The first is that somehow God will restore justice to the situation, if not now, then at a later date. So Zephaniah promises the people of Jerusalem:

> Do not fear, O Zion; do not let your hands grow weak. The Lord, your God, is in your midst, a warrior who gives victory…[he] will deal with all your oppressors.

We could read Zephaniah’s “oppressors” as mass shooters, and God’s promise as help to our society to triumph over their evil.

Or with [Mike Huckabee and others](http://blog.seattlepi.com/seattlepolitics/2012/12/14/absence-of-god-from-schools-to-blame-for-killings-huckabee/), we could insist that right belief in God instills a proper sense of morality that will steer us away from violence. If only we allowed God in the schools, such people say, we wouldn’t have these problems. We would know right from wrong and people wouldn’t do such horrible things!

I find neither of these explanations very satisfactory. Supernatural answers to the problem of suffering fall flat for the simple reason that they don’t seem to describe the observed facts. If God could intervene from outside the realm of common existence, he probably would—or should—have done so already. We need then to look for something within nature, which is to say ordinary life here on earth.

Likewise the idea that “if we only allowed God in schools, this wouldn’t happen” utterly fails. First of all, contrary to conservative myth, neither schoolchildren nor teachers are forbidden to pray in public schools. But really, the argument from morality is unworkable because we live in a pervasively religious society with morals largely dictated by the Christian supermajority. Anyone who believes that their God is not big enough or strong enough to withstand being “tossed out” of public schools doesn’t trust that God, nor do they appreciate the hegemony Christian norms enjoy in America. A God who has to be constantly praised and recognized before he will lift a finger to prevent the slaughter of children isn’t a reliable partner in explaining the persistent nature of suffering. He’s an ideological battering ram to be used against those of insufficient piety. In the same way, anyone who thinks the only way to teach their morality is to force it upon children who are busy trying to learn to read and write doesn’t have the courage of their convictions. It’s simply convenient to pin their losses in the marketplace of moral ideas on unfair competition from “secular humanism” in schools.

The best teacher of ethics is and always has been example, not assent to Christian-themed conservative ideology enforced through the mechanism of public schools. If we really want to teach children that violence is not acceptable, the answer is not “God in the schools,” whatever that means, but to tame our violence-soaked culture and to live our values by ending cheap and easy access to guns.

Neither explanation I have sketched out above matches very well with the witness of scripture. What we see particularly in the example of Jesus is a God who does not triumph over evil through force, nor by demanding society meet a rigid system of moral conformity, but surrendering to the forces of loneliness and alienation. It bears saying over and over again that the god Christians worship chose to go to his death alone and helpless rather than commit any act of violence or force. Because to do so would have only kept a wedge between God and humanity: sin and death and separation cannot be overcome by using more of them, in the same way that the answer to gun violence is not more of it, despite the revenge fantasies of many. This is what Bonhoeffer means when he says “only a weak God can save.” Only a weak God—one who is willing to suffer with humanity—can break the pattern.

And so paradoxically the same Jesus who goes to the cross alone becomes Emmanuel, God with us. In giving himself up to loneliness, the final existential disconnect between himself and others, Jesus maintains the connections not just between God and us, but between ourselves and others. He reconciles broken people to one another, and makes it possible for them to remain connected to one another.

On one level, this is to answer questions of theodicy the way scripture does: Why is there suffering? God is with us. Not *because*, not *in order that*, just simply, disjunctively, God is with us.

There’s more to this than being carried on the wings of an angel or having God watch over us from afar. To say that God is with us is to proclaim his willingness to remain *vulnerable*, to remain *open* to us and our pain. Through Christ’s entry into the world and through his death, God offers us a form of hospitality. We are welcomed into the very life of God through and with Christ, and—this is important—the work of the Holy Spirit.

Here at last is the source of Christian rejoicing today. We can rejoice even in such sad times because God remains vulnerable with us and to us. This has consequences for who we are in the world. It is no accident that [Paul’s instructions to the church at Philippi](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=222704146), from which we read this morning, contains an exhortation to rejoice almost in the same breath in which he encourages two feuding members of the church to get along with one another. The joy of knowing that God is with us in Christ now and from here on out is both the source of reconciliation and its result. Euodia and Syntyche ought to be of the same mind in Christ, which means they ought to set aside their differences and be together, as Christ is together with us. And the entire congregation ought to rejoice knowing that such a thing is possible. It is Christ’s nearness, and the peace it provokes, that makes it so. The wall of hostility has been broken down, and friendship is now available to all.

Today also marks the beginning of [*Las Posadas*](http://cibola.nmgenweb.us/lasposadas.html), a tradition common to Spanish cultures. Over the course of nine nights, “pilgrims” playing the parts of Joseph and Mary travel from house to house begging for shelter. For eight nights, those inside the houses respond,

> Keep on going and leave us alone, we will not open for you.  Who knows, you may be thieves.  Just keep on going.

Finally, on the ninth night—Christmas Eve—the dialog changes. The pilgrims are recognized and welcomed in for a feast and a re-telling of the story of Christ’s birth.

The Posadas remind us that the business Christians are meant to be about is hospitality, the risky welcoming of strangers into our midst. In our vulnerability to them—in our refusal to hold ourselves separate from them in fear—we take part in the life of our God, who entered the world through desperately poor parents, people in a strange town with nowhere to turn in their time of need. We do for others what was done for him, what allowed him to save us from our poverty and alienation. We make witness over and against all of the guns and creeps of the world that there is a far greater reality than theirs, one in which we cannot be torn from one another nearly so easily as they think. It is a counter-imagination that offers to the world a welcome more powerful than military-style assault rifles.

We cannot deny the sadness and terror of what has happened this week, and all too often in recent history. Twenty-two children and five adults are dead, and that’s real. But through the work of the Spirit within us, we can refuse to be afraid of one another. No violence can finally separate us one from another; only we can do that. In Christ, death has been served, and we are free to open our homes and our hearts to one another. This commitment to remaining with and being vulnerable to our neighbors is the very best Christians can give—whether or not those to whom we open ourselves share our beliefs. Regardless of one’s faith, the best revenge against mass murder is in the end to love one another. Only that can bring life that lasts, life that is worth living. Joy is simply the outward manifestation of an open heart: the inward determination to live by the grace-filled reality we claim as our own.


