---
layout: post
title: I saved this one to Dropbox. Then Dropbox went down, and I had to ad-lib *again*.
date: '2015-08-31 00:31:27'
---


[Mark 7](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=307979969)

At a certain point the Christian faith demands we change some kind of behavior. It is not enough to believe in Jesus. In the [words of the apostle James](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=307979906), we must be

doers of the word, and not merely hearers who deceive themselves. For if any are hearers of the word and not doers, they are like those who look at themselves in a mirror; for they look at themselves and, on going away, immediately forget what they were like.

If we only let the words of the gospel wash over us without putting them into action, we cannot really be Christian, in the sense that we don’t act like Christ. If we don’t do something with our faith, according to James, we soon lose our Christian identity.

Which is all very nice, but it raises the question of what exactly it is we’re supposed to do. Being nice to other people, being kind, is only part of it. James says we should “bridle our tongues,” “care for orphans,” and keep ourselves “unstained by the world.”

So: don’t sin, which is a bit vague, take of orphans—really, people who have no one else to care for them—and watch our words. This seems simple enough, but perhaps we could use still more clarity. Jesus spells it out for us: whether or not we wash our hands before dinner matters less than what we say and do to one another. We ought to avoid:

fornication, theft, murder, adultery, avarice, wickedness, deceit, licentiousness, envy, slander, pride, and folly.

Can’t forget the folly.

Now all of a sudden we’ve gone from simple to complicated. Fornication seems easy to avoid: don’t sleep around. Theft, murder and adultery also seem easily controlled. Don’t do those things. Avarice—greed—is more difficult. Everyone wants something they don’t have sometimes. I’m not entirely what “wickedness” means; the Greek is literally “pain-spreading evil,” which is no help. Deceit, everybody lies at least once in a while. Licentiousness is just another word for fornication, envy’s another one for greed. Avoiding slander, or speaking evil of someone else, is easier said than done. Everybody’s proud sometimes, everybody’s foolish, some of us more than others.

It’s a lot to keep track of, especially what with Jesus’ other commands to feed my sheep and love one another and refrain from judgment and whatnot. That’s not even to mention all the instructions we get from the apostles later on in the New Testament. You try to live up to the whole list of do’s and don’ts at once, you might sprain something. Worse yet, you might let a stray act of wickedness slip through, maybe even some pride or worse yet, folly.

I’m having a bit of fun with this, of course, but you get the point. Being a Christian relieves us of the burden of following the Old Testament law, but even living up to New Testament standards can be overwhelming. It might be helpful to have some sort of general principle to guide our actions, some general rubric to help us sort out what we ought and ought not be doing.

As it happens, Christians have a word for exactly that. It’s called “humility.” That simply describes the ongoing practice of clearing away our “stuff” in order to grow in love for others. To put it another way, humility is getting ourselves out of the way so that we can imitate Christ more effectively.

Now, it’s important to understand what humility is *not* before we embrace what it *is*. According to my seminary professor [Roberta Bondi](http://www.amazon.com/To-Love-as-God-Loves/dp/0800620410), humility is not any of the following things:

- Accepting an inferior position in life because you’re told to do so
- Self-hate or self-denial
- Passive aggression or manipulation
- Guilt or guilt-tripping

There’s a very clever parody of this sort of humility in Stella Gibbons’ novel *[Cold Comfort Farm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cold_Comfort_Farm)*, where the hellfire-and-brimstone preacher Amos Starkadder speaks to the congregation he’s founded, the Church of the Quivering Brethren:

> “Ye know, doan’t ye, what it feels like when ye burn yer hand . . wi’ a match when ye’re lightin’ one of they godless cigarettes? Aye. It stings wi’ a fearful pain, doan’t it? And ye run away to clap a bit o’ butter on it . . . Ah but there’ll be no butter in hell!”

Starkadder’s sermon is enough to set the congregation trembling, hence their name. And despite his attacks on them, they keep coming back, Sunday after Sunday.

It’s all very funny, but it’s not actual humility. In fact, understanding humility in this way can cause great injustice. Women especially get the idea that they deserve to be treated like dirt. But true humbleness can never be forced onto someone. Rather, Bondi says, humility is a way of finding freedom by giving up baggage we often don’t even know we’re carrying: judgmentalism, the need to be right, the need to be above reproach, wanting to see ourselves as heroes. We are meant to be responsible to one another, and yet we find plenty of excuses not to be. We say this person doesn’t deserve it, or he’s on the wrong path, or if I reach out to her I’ll commit a sin, or since I can’t do it perfectly, I might as well not do anything at all. We peel these excuses away through prayer, repentance (coming to terms in an honest and open ways with our failings) and seeking and offering forgiveness.

The work of <span class="quoteleft">humility is a lifelong commitment.</span> It takes determination and healing, to be honest. Because, paradoxically, humility can’t be found if we have no self-esteem to begin with, or a damaged sense of the self. As with money, so with ourselves: we can’t be generous if we have nothing to give. But if we can come to understand ourselves as beloved children of God, no better or worse than anyone else, but simply brothers and sisters, we can do wonderful things. Turns out the trick to moving mountains is not to get too big for your britches. Who knew?

Jesus tells the Pharisees and the scribes that they’re being arrogant, essentially. For one thing, they’re picking out something his disciples are doing wrong for no better reason than that it makes them feel better than the disciples. The Pharisees know darn well that washing one’s hands before eating doesn’t accomplish very much toward godliness. It reflects a Jewish tradition of going above and beyond the actual rules as a way of setting the highest standards for themselves. The disciples are in no danger of violating God’s law, only the social customs of the day. Jesus chastises the Pharisees for making law and custom the same thing. One is from God, and one is not.

The Pharisees and the scribes are picking at this one small lapse while ignoring the much larger issue, which are all these sins Jesus lists, none of which, you will note, come about because people forget to wash their hands with soap and water, despite anything your mother may have told you.

As a matter of fact, maybe they come about exactly because people do wash their hands. When the focus is on rigid adherence to rules, rather than being responsible to others, bad things happen. I saw someone talk this week about evangelical friends who “think that if they are turned on when they see a woman they have ‘committed adultery in their heart.'” He continues, “<span class="quoteright">with that kind of pressure, people blow</span>,” meaning they go on to commit actual adultery, or they act out in other ways. This is exactly what Roberta Bondi talks about with the need to be above reproach: if you can’t admit that you have sexual thoughts and desires just like everyone else, you can’t control those thoughts and desires. More to the point, you won’t be able to be responsible to your spouse or family.

But how does any of this apply to us? How can we become doers of the word, not just hearers? I don’t believe that any of you are prone to any of the major sins listed by Jesus—fornication, theft, murder, adultery, and so forth—and if you are, I really don’t want to know, because then we have to do something about it. Fortunately, as I say, it doesn’t seem like we’ll have to worry about the big-ticket items.

The smaller sins are another story, though. You all are nice people and I like you, but in the end, we’re all just human. We all get into “envy, slander, pride, and folly” at some point.

Perhaps the most important step is simply to say that much. I too do wrong, because I too am a sinner, as are we all. When we can admit that, we can begin to do something about it.

And then there’s prayer. I encourage you all to spend time in formal prayer, but informal prayers might be more effective here: saying in the moment, “God, I wish I weren’t like this,” “God, help me be less nasty when I talk.” When we want to be different than what we are, when we yearn for the freedom to be better people—that’s when the change begins to happen.

Repentance covers some of that territory as well: repentance, or turning back to God, involves the desire to change. But as I said earlier, it also involves the willingness to take a good hard look at what we’ve done in the past. It doesn’t have to be self-hatred or mortifying ourselves by replaying our regret over and over again. All it takes is saying “Hey, maybe I could have done better there,” or “<span class="quoteleft">You know, I did okay.</span> I should do that more often.” Allowing yourself to be pulled toward positive patterns of behavior can be as effective, if not more, than turning away from the negative.

Giving and receiving forgiveness can be just as simple. Start with saying “I’m sorry” when you’ve done something mean or harsh or thoughtless. When someone says “I’m sorry” to you, accept their apology. It may take some time on your part, it may take some effort. It may require you to explain to the person that there’s more to their offense than they understand, and therefore more responsibility for them to accept. As difficult as it is, the ministry of forgiveness part of staying in relationship.

But don’t take responsibility for things you are not responsible for. Again women in particular are prone to believing they are to blame for the abuse that comes their way. It is not humility to make yourself responsible for someone’s sin against you; it is to be victimized once more.

I say that clearly because the work that must begin before any other is the work of healing. Confession, prayer, repentance, giving and receiving forgiveness can themselves bring healing, but only the grace of God in Christ can bring true fullness of life. You are indeed beloved children of God, brothers and sisters in Christ, no better and no worse than anyone else. If anyone tells you to wash your hands before dinner, it had better be because they’re afraid of germs. Amen.


