---
layout: post
title: The Lord of the Living and the Dead
date: '2015-11-01 20:48:46'
---


[Isaiah 25:6-10 & John 11:32-44](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=313410530)

It appears that on All Saints Sunday last year, I spoke at some length on actual saints. I find hagiography (that’s the study of saints) a fascinating subject, one well worth the time I invest into it. If memory serves, you do not. That, as far as I can tell, is because you’re sane, reasonable people. Therefore, I will not bore you with talk about St. This or St. That or St. Such-and-So. I will bore you with another subject entirely. Kind of.

If I promise to be brief, will you forgive me?

It’s like this: in our confirmation class last week, we watched a video that talked about whether it was enough to believe in Jesus, or if we had to follow him, meaning to imitate his actions. The conclusion the video worked up to was that the Christian faith isn’t about what we believe, or what we do. In fact, it isn’t about us at all. It’s about God, about what God has done for us and what God continues to do for—and through—us.

A more sophisticated way to talk about this is to say that we participate in the life of God. It is Jesus who lives in us, and in that life we live in God.

To make things just that much more complicated, the<span class="quoteright"> life of the God we know in the Holy Trinity is self-giving by nature</span>. Jesus graciously defers to God the Father, who makes room for the work of the Holy Spirit, and they all make room for us. Because their life is our life, their nature is our nature. The work of the Christian faith is to uncover our authentic selves, the ones marked by mercy, compassion, and generosity. The saints, I want to suggest to you, are the people who have learned this lesson already. On All Saints Day, we remember the capital-S Saints who found their true nature in life and modeled it for the rest of us. We also remember the small-s saints, the dead who have gone before us, who have found their true lives in death.

I know this is heady stuff. What you need to know is that the saints are those people who have heard and received the promise of new life in Christ. By weeping to see the grief of Martha and Mary, Jesus demonstrates the compassionate love of God for humanity. And by bringing Lazarus out of his tomb Jesus shows by actions what Paul tells us in words: “whether we live or whether we die, we are the Lord’s,” who is “the Lord of the living and the dead.” Which is to say, when we find our lives in God, our physical state becomes irrelevant. The saints are united with Christ and with one another across time and whether living or dead. On All Saints Day we remember those who are no longer physically alive. More important, we express our basic and unbreakable connection to the saints through communion, liturgy, and lighting candles.

In that expression we participate in the reality of the connection we proclaim. We are united with the dead because we say we are. We are united with the dead because they—and we—have our lives in Christ.

On All Saints Day, we affirm the truth of the promises made to us by God: that some day God will feed us with rich food and well-aged wine on Mt. Zion. There is no money that can buy our lives, but God provides them and sustains them for free. God will destroy on Zion “the shroud that is cast over all peoples, the sheet that is spread over all nations.” That’s not a funeral shroud, but a mourner’s veil, or possibly the curtain that kept the innermost sanctuary of the Temple hidden. We trust and we believe in the promise that we will see God face-to-face, and be united with him in the new life to come after our deaths.

<span class="quoteleft">We trust and we believe that the Lord God “will swallow up death forever,”</span> that “the Lord God will wipe away the tears from all faces.” (We believe that so much we put it in John’s Revelation, all the way at the other end of the Bible.) There will come a day when death is no more, a day when there will be no cause for weeping or mourning, because we will be on Mt. Zion with God.

There will come a day, but not today. Today we are allowed our sadness and grief because the ones whom we love have fallen asleep in the Lord. We can remember them with happiness too, of course, with anger if need be. However we want to call the dead to mind, we are allowed, because this is All Saints Day, whether with a big S or a small s, and some perhaps not even saints at all. That’s okay, too. God will gather all the people in.

As we remember, as we express and experience our continuing life with the saints who have gone before us, we must know that what we believe about life and death is not the important thing here. Neither is whether we ourselves are living or dead. It is the ongoing life of God that matters. That life overflows into our lives. It calls our lives into being, nourishes them, and sends them on to their final destination, secure in and united with God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. With the saints, we give thanks for the continuing life we have received, and look to the one that has been promised in the kingdom to come, so that on the final day, we can say, “This is the Lord for whom we have waited. Let be glad and rejoice in his salvation.” Amen.


