---
layout: post
title: '"I Just Want To See His Face" was a miracle of studio editing to create a
  spontaneous sound'
date: '2015-09-27 21:32:38'
---


[Mark 9:30-37](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=310388908)

Someone asked me the other day, in reference to the church, “How do you get people interested in serving the community?”

I assumed he wasn’t looking for an actual answer, so I left my response with something like, “Yeah, it’s tough.” But I have theories!

The answer I should have given was, “You let them. You let them get interested.” I don’t mean this in the sense of reverse psychology, of persuading kids to pay to paint the fence for you. No matter how you dress it up, something you have to do is something you have to do, an unpleasant task is still an unpleasant task. Charging for the privilege of painting may have worked once for Huck and Finn, but in the long run, their friends would have caught on and come to resent the manipulation. That kind of thing simply doesn’t work in an ongoing community.

But listen: when Bill was little, he was often interested in what Jen was doing in the kitchen. So she let him help her when she could. Occasionally, she’d teach him how to make something simple that he liked: scrambled eggs, mac and cheese, a grilled cheese sandwich. That, along with some natural inclination, means the kid can cook now. At age 12, he’s more able in the kitchen than a lot of grown men, and more important, he *wants* to do it. Not all the time, mind you. But he’s good at it when he does cook, and there is nothing forced or inauthentic about it when he does. He’s in the kitchen because he chooses to be there. He welcomes the opportunity.

This is more or less the approach I have taken with you when it comes to ministry. I let you have fun with the food drive for the Salvation Army—you all were so pleased when you got rid of the beard—and I’ve given you some other opportunities along the way. Some of those you took, others not. But all along, I’ve tried to stay away from the language of requirement, or of urging you to do your duty. The minute you start thinking in those terms, it kills the fun and turns it into a burden. And who wants to be burdened?

In any case, the result has been something like with Bill in the kitchen. You don’t always want to take up the work of ministry—you’re selective about what you do—and like Bill, you’re sometimes capable of more than you think you are. But when you do take it up, you do just fine, and more to the point, you want to do it. You welcome the opportunity. That, along with you natural confidence and ability, leads to good things.

(It occurs to me here that one of the things we tell Bill also applies to you. “If you can cook dinner for somebody else,” we say, “You will never lack for a date.” To which he always responds, “Then I’m never cooking for anyone.” You get my drift.)

You do indeed get my drift, I’m sure. Like the disciples in Mark’s gospel, we are meant to welcome our opportunities with the enthusiasm of children. Children are excited by the chance to flex new muscles, to do new things. Anyone who’s watched a kid with his training wheels freshly removed taking the bike up and down the street for a couple of hours at a stretch knows this.

Now, obviously, I’m getting the story a bit backwards here: Jesus tells the disciples to welcome children, not welcome *like* children. I don’t care, I’m rolling with it. But it’s true that we are called upon to welcome the weak, the poor, the powerless into our lives, not the strong, the rich, the powerful. If you want to be a leader, Jesus tells his disciples, if you want to be greatest, you have to be among the least, and welcome the least. In his day, that meant children, the most marginalized of people.

The other thing I’ve got backwards is that Jesus of course does *not* say, “Whoever welcomes one such child in my name welcomes a neighborhood ministry opportunity.” He says, “Whoever welcomes one such child in my name welcomes me, and whoever welcomes *me* welcomes the one who sent me.” When you welcome a child, or any person pushed to the corners of our society, you are not welcoming the image of Jesus, or a symbol of Jesus. You are taking part in the resurrected life and encountering Jesus himself, the Risen Lord and Savior, true God from true God. Notice that this lesson isn’t about how the disciples are to be nice to kids. It’s about who Jesus is, as the Messiah.

This is what separates the work of Christian ministry from simply doing good in our community. Ministry is more than being inspired by Jesus as a role model. That’s what Unitarians and others who don’t believe in the divinity of Jesus do. It’s more than helping others because that’s what we think we’ve been told to do by Jesus. It’s more even than meeting someone and by welcoming or serving them have them point us in the direction of Jesus. It’s a real experience, the content of what it means to live and to be in the presence of Jesus himself.

That, in turn, is why I’ve mostly suggested welcoming refugees as a ministry, or practicing hospitality with people who are different than ourselves. Jen didn’t bother teaching Bill how to cook fish; he doesn’t like it, he won’t do it. You’re not soup-kitchen or Habitat for Humanity people, partly because they exceed your reach, partly because they’re just not your style. But when we—*we*, you and I—welcome people, we experience Christ, and through him God the Father. There is no magic to this, no hocus-pocus: you meet a child, you actually meet Jesus. That’s it, that’s all. There’s your salvation, there’s your fullness of life.

This is understandably difficult for us to perceive. We see a child, or a refugee, or someone else we should be welcoming, and we see that person, not Jesus. How do we attune ourselves to the presence of Christ before us?

We come to the communion table.

In the same way that welcoming a child is more than just an inspired act or a symbolic act, so communion is more than just something we do because Jesus tells us to, or because it symbolizes the forgiveness of our sins and our union with Jesus and other Christians. In the bread and the wine, we actually *are* forgiven. We actually *are* joined to Jesus and the church throughout time and space. We actually *are* fed by Jesus and participate once again in the resurrected life. We actually *do* experience the bread of heaven as the fundamental food that sustains our whole lives. Or at least we should: that’s what it’s there for.

Think of it this way: the bread and the wine aren’t vehicles of grace. They don’t represent our salvation, they’re not symbols of Jesus. They *are* Jesus, and in them, we learn what it means to be in his presence. It is to be filled, to be loved, to be cared for, to know that one’s life is precious to God and so to be supported. Because we know that, we can in turn learn what it truly means to see Jesus in the little children and the other “least of these.” Strange as it sounds, bread and wine teach us to recognize Jesus.

It is also true that we are best able to do this when somebody *lets* us, rather than *makes* us. As soon as the church made baptism and communion symbolic rituals that had to be done, not for themselves, but for some kind of separate salvation, people started to lose interest in them. Because once it’s not something that you get to do, once it’s something that you’re supposed to do, you’re right back to striving to be the greatest by how early or often you can be baptized, or how many times you can take communion. It’s only when we can choose that we can choose to be the least, rather than the greatest, and it’s only when we can choose to be the least that we can see Jesus’ face in the face of the people we encounter and welcome him.

Or to put it in much simpler terms: God’s in the kitchen, making up some bread, and some wine. Would you like to pull up a stool and help? You might learn a thing or two. It’s up to you. Amen.


