---
layout: post
title: Sunday Discipleship Blogging
date: '2015-09-13 19:20:06'
---


[Mark 8:27-38](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=309171083)

I have been instructed—firmly—to keep this sermon short, in the interest of polka. Also in the interest of the cookout after worship, to which everyone is invited. There will be brats, but no beer. Let’s be clear about that. We are not Lutherans.

I guess the priorities around here are clear. And…I can’t say I disagree with them. Polka bands and food preach better than I ever could.

Maybe that’s not true. There never was a brat patty that could equal “take up your cross and follow me,” no matter how good the pig. <span class="quoteleft">This is one of the most challenging teachings in any of the gospels</span>: it directly confronts our sense of identity and purpose—who we are, and what we are about.

We have familiarized Jesus’ words by speaking of the burdens of our lives as “my cross to bear.” So a health problem becomes a cross. A difficulty in a relationship becomes a cross. Any kind of ongoing trouble, really, is a cross to bear. Or, somewhat better, we turn Jesus’ instructions into a calling to ministry. We take up our crosses when we are kind to one another, when we are generous, when we work at a food pantry or a soup kitchen. Anything that burdens or inconveniences us in the service of Jesus or the church is a cross. (I’d say that about the Chicken and Ribs dinner, but the truth is we have too much fun putting that on.)

The desire to tame Jesus’ words is understandable. The last thing anyone wants to think about is the reality that Jesus calls his disciples to death. Not just any death, mind you. As we are sometimes reminded on Good Friday, crucifixion was a long, horrible, and painful means of execution for people the Empire wanted to make an example of: the worst criminals and rebels against Roman authority. As such, it was a shameful, lonely way to die. No survivor of a crucified person would want to admit as much. To die by the cross was to die as a tortured social outcast, and Jesus wants his followers to take it up willingly! He wants them to *deny* or “disown” themselves, to give up family and inheritance and follow him to their ultimate, shameful death. It’s no wonder some people thought Christianity was a bit of a cult.

Peter wants to get Jesus off this message, perhaps for reasons we don’t expect. He “began to rebuke” Jesus, which we typically take to mean *chastise* or scold. But there’s a nuance in the Greek: [the word](http://biblehub.com/greek/2008.htm) means literally “to place value on.” So it can have a positive meaning: you can say Jesus Christ in his glory receives his proper value. Or it can have a negative meaning, something like “You’re not putting the proper weight on this situation, you need to take this more seriously.” Both senses are present when Peter speaks to Jesus.

Jesus, after all, has just led the disciples to the understanding that he is the messiah, the Christ long expected by the Jewish people. That to Peter’s mind ought to be a thing of honor and glory. But Jesus has immediately undercut Peter’s understanding of what it means to be messiah by saying that he must be rejected by his own people, die and be raised on the third day. So Peter “rebukes” him, he tells Jesus to put the proper value on being Christ.

Then Jesus rebukes Peter. “I don’t think you understand, Peter” he says. “I am putting the proper value on it.” Satan was the great tempter of people and adversary of God, so when Jesus tells Peter “Get behind me, Satan!” it’s a way of saying, “Don’t pull me off the right track” or “Don’t oppose me.” <span class="quoteright">This is what God wants. Jesus is sure of that.</span>

It’s what God wants of Jesus, and it’s what Jesus seems to want of his disciples. This leaves us in something of a pickle. You and I are not likely to die a shameful, pain-filled death in open rebellion against an oppressive government. Even if we wanted to, the opportunity is just not there.

We must always remember that the gospels were not written for us. Mark recorded and treasured the words of Jesus to give comfort to his own generation of disciples, many of whom were in fact required to take up their cross and go to their death in Jesus’ name. If the traditions are accurate, Mark served as Peter’s interpreter in Rome, where he was awaiting execution. In fact, it is said that of the original disciples, the only one not to die violently was John, and him only because he was sent away in exile.

We are not going into exile. We will not be killed. We get to listen to polka music.

Jesus’ words, so challenging to us, are a blessing on those disciples who are already undergoing great suffering and death. For us, they are a reminder of the nature of the messiah, who came to suffer, not to cause suffering, to serve, not to be served. And they are a reminder of what we are called to live as in imitation of him.

[A little later in Mark’s gospel](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=309171669), after James and John ask to sit at Jesus’ right and left hand, he tells all the disciples,

whoever wishes to become great among you must be your servant, and whoever wishes to be first among you must be slave of all.

There is a principle in the Protestant tradition that the church must be always reformed, always reforming. The content of this reformation is humility and love. We constantly need to be reminded of who Jesus is, who we are, and who we are meant to be. That might not be people who are able to pick up their crosses and follow Jesus, or literally lose our lives in order to find them. But we can be people who try. If we do, we will find that when he comes in glory, Jesus will not be ashamed of us. Amen.


