---
layout: post
title: Blest Be The Tie That Binds
date: '2016-01-10 19:00:47'
---


[Isaiah 43:1-7](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=319451796)

Any time a pastor leaves a congregation, there are some members of the church who believe they must have done something wrong to cause the departure. They may not recognize it consciously, but underneath their thoughts, where feelings dwell, it worries at them.

I am speaking, of course, of when a long-term pastor departs. For example, when someone who has been with the church for seventeen years moves on to a new position. I will never admit, no matter how good the time, that it’s possible for a church to become attached to a minister who’s only been around for a year-and-a-half.

Joking aside, I think you know what I mean. When I arrived at Bethany in June of 2014, you were scared, confused, and demoralized. You weren’t sure what would come next for your congregation, how you would get through the time without a settled pastor, even if this community could continue. More than a few suspected that this was your own fault somehow, that you were being punished for not being supportive enough of your pastor.

Now look at you! <span class="quoteleft">You’re flourishing, in your own quiet, steady way.</span> You have a renewed sense of the joy of worship. You’ve picked up if not new members, at least some regular visitors who seem to be steadily integrating themselves into the Bethany family. You’re seeing familiar faces becoming active again. Your relationships with one another have been renewed, as they have with the Northeast Association and the Wisconsin Conference. The process is not complete, but you do seem to be embracing a new identity as a giving church, one determined to welcome the greater community inside its walls. If nothing else, you’ve learned you can survive all kinds of pastors!

Who could have predicted how far we would travel in just eighteen months? I think most people who have visited Bethany, or joined it on the way for a little while, know that it’s a diamond in the rough. But I don’t think any of us knew just how much it would come back to life in this time.

I have to acknowledge that I have come some distance as well. Perhaps it’s easier for you to see the development than it is for me, but I’ve changed, I know. My theology is surer and deeper. I have been able to practice new ways to lead. I’ve organized, or helped to organize, things that I never thought I’d be able to pull off. I earned a degree in Web Design and Development! None of this would have been possible without your grace, patience, and support, and for all of that I am deeply humbled and grateful.

(I am also just as fat as when I began, and quite a bit balder. <span class="quoteright">Not all change is positive.</span>)

None of this is to say that there are not challenges ahead for you. There are. I think you know them already: you’re an aging congregation, you’re a small congregation, you’re a congregation with limited resources in location and funding.

Come what may, however, I will have no worries for you. I have always had, and still do, every confidence in you. Whatever your ultimate fate will be, you will meet it with faith, grace, and reconciled hearts. I have no doubts about this.

More important, I know that whether you live or whether you die, you belong to the Lord, and I know that the Lord is good. God says to us in the book of Isaiah:

Do not fear, for I have redeemed you;   
   I have called you by name, you are mine.

That scripture was quoted to my seminary cohort on our very first day of orientation; it was practically the first thing anyone told us, other than where the bathrooms and the snacks were. But it applies to much more than the ordained. You too have been claimed by the living God. You too have a ministry to carry out. You too have a journey to travel on. God will protect you on the way:

When you pass through the waters, I will be with you;   
   and through the rivers, they shall not overwhelm you;   
when you walk through fire you shall not be burned,  
    and the flame shall not consume you.

Wherever you go, whatever may become of you, the Lord will be there with you. I am certain of that, and I know that this is your faith as well: that we need not fear, because God is with us. Because of that, I will not lose a minute of sleep worrying about your destiny after January 15th.

But why? Why would God promise us such protection? Isaiah answers:

Because you are precious in my sight,   
   and honored, and I love you.

The Israelites were unique in their time in claiming that their God was not limited by geography, or by the power of those who honored him. They claimed their God as The God, the creator and sustainer of all that was. Other deities were phonies, so the claim went. Even more audaciously, the Israelites claimed that out all of creation, out of all the rich and powerful nations that this God—the Lord—could have claimed, he chose Israel, a small, weak, obscure people to be his own, to be his love. In the same way, I believe, God chooses churches like Bethany. Out of all the well-endowed, popular, large churches that God could have claimed, he chose you, a small, aging, just-barely-scraping-by church to be precious, and honored, and loved by him.

It should go without saying that I agree with this, but apparently, I just said it. You are precious in my sight, and honored, and I love you. <span class="quoteright">I will miss you all terribly.</span> Nothing against the people gathered here this morning, but I think the worst part of leaving will be saying goodbye to the homebound members, and not hearing the Mom’s Day Out kids across the hall. I was just getting them to give me high-fives. My new office is going to be much quieter and sadder. (On the other hand, it’s next to a large pond, so maybe I’ll soon have some ducks to distract me.)

As I say, I’m confident that you will be okay after I leave. As I said in the newsletter, keep moving forward and God will take care of the rest.

In the end, I have to echo [the words of John the Baptist](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=319452008):

one who is more powerful than I is coming; I am not worthy to untie the thong of his sandals.

I often say to churches I serve that I hope the next pastor will be better than I am, not as an insult to myself, but simply out of hope that God will continue to bless you more and more richly. But in quoting the gospel, I do not refer, of course, to my successor in this pulpit. I’m convinced it will be a woman, for one thing, even if it’s not the same woman the Search Committee might be thinking of!

No, I am speaking of course about Jesus himself. Whatever happens to me, whatever happens to you, whoever you have to lead you here; they are all insignificant compared to the coming of the Christ to baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. Your journey, your destination, is to meet the Messiah when he comes again. All of our journeys, all of our comings and goings, all of our lives, have to be set in the light of that [much greater story](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=319452086).

If we live, we live to the Lord. If we die, we die to the Lord. So whether we live or whether we die, we belong to the Lord, who is the Lord of both the living and the dead.

It will be sad to say goodbye to all of you, my friends, even after so short a stay with you. But we live and we die to the Lord. Keep that in mind, and no matter who your pastor is, you’re going to be okay. Amen.


