---
layout: post
title: Plug One, Plug Two
date: '1999-09-30 00:00:00'
---


**I**

 A few weeks ago, in a desultory act of consumerism, we stopped by Chestnut Street Books in downtown Lancaster, Pennsylvania. As we recall it, it was a hot, sticky Friday morning, and we were looking for something better to read than the usual Japanese comic books. On an ordinary Friday morning, we would have been weighed down with plastic bags brimming with fresh vegetables from the Lancaster Farmer’s Market, but our grocery shopping was already complete this day. Our cantaloupes, green peppers, pears, and containers of chicken pot pie and rice pudding waited safely in the passenger seat of our new Ford truck parked just down the block. Thus unencumbered, we felt confident enough in ourselves to breeze past the No Food or Drink sign on the glass door, and into the musty, beautiful atmosphere of the used bookstore.

 We didn’t allow ourselves to be distracted by the Civil War histories or the overwrought culinary masterpieces we first encountered. There wasn’t so much time that we could allow our lingering to turn to dawdling. So we contented ourselves with a quick sweep of the fiction shelves before we moved on to richer fields, such as religion—Bharati Mukherjee? Yes, but not the one we were after. Salman Rushdie? No. James Baldwin? Yes, but on second thought, we weren’t as interested as we first believed. We were tempted by the rare (and supposedly first-rate) Richard A. Fox biography of Reinhold Niebuhr, but we resisted temptation in favor of a more ascetic volume on the Torah.

 We were almost out of the store when our eyes landed on a display case brimming with old Penguin and Perennial Library paperbacks. Cheap copies of classic literature always brings back pleasant memories of high school for us, so we decided to investigate further. A bronzed warrior’s head stared spookily out of the cover of a collection of plays by Sophocles. A decidedly more friendly Will Shakespeare graced the cover of Romeo & Juliet. But the book that tugged on us most insistently was a plain, unassuming-looking copy of E.B. White’s The Second Tree from the Corner. It was a dollar and thirty-five cents, only sixty cents more than it sold for in 1965. Even The Philadelphia Inquirer costs 75¢ nowadays; it was too good, and too satisfying, a bargain to ignore. We ponied up promptly, and haven’t regretted it so far.

 We have known of the magic of E.B. White for some time now, of course. Once, in one of those crazy infatuations that lead young men to war, or to read the collected works of Ford Maddox Ford, we sat down with both volumes of the Collected Essays of E.B. White over the course of two weeks.

Our eyes watered, and we learned more than we ever supposed possible about broody hens or the rules of grammar, but the infatuation turned into a deeper, more serious kind of love. Sometimes it happens. The concision stuck with us, the simple cleanness of the sentences, the odd Yankee rhythms. E.B. White knew better than anyone what to leave in and what to leave out of a sentence, and when to end it before it took on a life of its own. That knowledge, cultivated over years of writing and rewriting, is what makes his prose so refreshing, so interesting to return to years later.

Centuries from now, we believe, pastors and other word-hounds will still be reading E.B. White, while lesser, more showy—ourselves included—authors will have fallen by the wayside.

 

**II**

 A far different—but equally pleasurable—read came my way in the mail about a month ago. Some, but not all, of my readers know that my friend and intellectual imam Craig Werner has published his “big” book, A Change Is Gonna Come: Music, Race & The Soul Of America. (Given his difficulties trying to find a name for the book that hadn’t already been hijacked by some puff-piece biography, I think A Change Is Gonna Come is about as fine a title as could be had. However, I would like to suggest the alternate, and equally appropriate, name of Craig Werner’s Big Book of Black Music.)  
 All kidding aside, this is a fine piece of scholarship, and I recommend it highly, even if you think the study of African-American popular music is not your cup of tea. (Full disclosure, and a bit of bragging: I’m listed in the acknowledgements near the front of the book. The book is cool for other reasons, though.) Werner is able to demonstrate convincingly some fairly important ideas. To wit, every form of American popular music in the twentieth century has been influenced to some degree by African-American culture. Jazz, Blues, and Rhythm-and-Blues are strictly speaking African-American forms; Soul—blue or brown-eyed—grew out of black Gospel music, and Rock-and-Roll came from the collision of Country-and-Western and Blues or Rhythm-and-Blues. Even Country music itself was affected by black culture: The Carter Family and Hank Williams both claimed to have learned guitar from local Blues musicians.

 That much is no revelation; anyone who has thought seriously about American popular culture has learned as much. Nor is it particularly startling to hear the extent to which this music has soaked into our culture. Anyone who grew up with a radio on upstairs and a television blaring downstairs knows that one of the raw ingredients in the American culture factories is popular music. It is as indispensable as sex, violence, and insipid cartoon characters. What is new and interesting in Werner’s book are the conclusions which he draws from these basic premises. One is that, because of the far-reaching nature of African-American music, we have essentially (and unknowingly) imported a West African theology into the very core of our culture. I’m not able to be very convincing here, and I sure don’t want to write a paper on the book at the moment. But just follow the logic for a minute: African, and African-American, music is at its core spiritual. That is to say, it is a profound—if very much camouflaged—reflection on “man and God and law,” as Bob Dylan put it. Because we have internalized the musical forms which contain these notions, by extension, we have internalized the messages which those forms bear, whether we know it or not. It’s as if the grammar of our thought had been changed by contact with another, and profoundly different, culture.

 Moreover, African-American music is not only spiritual, but political. African culture generally makes less of a distinction between those sides of life than European culture traditionally has, but this goes beyond the slaves in Gone With the Wind singing “Go Down Moses”1 as they march out to build trenches around Atlanta. What A Change Is Gonna Come is able to demonstrate is that every African-American song—at least any of them worth talking about—is to greater or lesser extent a “Redemption Song,” and that involves dimensions both religious and politic.

 The real value of the book, though, is not in some queasy rehashed Marxist theory, staring up at us like yesterday’s refried beans. The music matters, Werner tells us in the introduction, because “black music provides a clear vision of how we [Americans] might begin to come to terms with the burden of our shared history.” This is a profoundly transformative vision of culture, one that is rooted in both hope and realism:

> Even when they force you to accept uncomfortable truths, the blues never explain away how things feel. They make you deal with the evil in the world and the evil in your head, help you find the strength to get up and face another…haunted day. Testifying to the power of love, gospel gives us the courage to keep on pushing for a redemption that is at once spiritual and political. Gospel reminds us we’re all in it together, though the definition of “we” varies. Jazz is innovation; it refuses to accept the way things are, envisions ways of reaching a higher ground we’re only beginning to imagine.

Acknowledging the real presence of evil; testifying to the power of love and seeking courage from it; imagining a higher ground. This is theological stuff, and worthwhile if only for reminding us of the African-American insistence on liberation as a necessary part of Christian belief. Buy this book, and then start thinking about how to set you and your community free. Because isn’t that we’re supposed to be about?


