---
layout: post
title: Grief Work
date: '1999-11-04 00:00:00'
---


Oh boy, will I ever get some mail on this one. The thought occurred to me the other day on my way to see my pastoral counselor that I have been in a kind of grieving process ever since my ministry began back in January. I don’t know where these thoughts come from. Probably it’s best just to say that it’s a long, empty road between Lancaster and Harrisburg, and to leave it at that.

 My way of thinking about being a minister has followed Elisabeth Kubler-Ross’ classic scheme almost turn for turn. First there was denial: nah, I’m not really a pastor. I’m a punk rocker/writer/academic/businessman in disguise. This stage lasted the longest, perhaps the first six months of my tenure at Faith Church. It was tempered somewhat by knowing that I loved making pastoral calls, that I loved and was concerned for my congregation, but it was easy enough to keep myself from admitting the truth. I didn’t even own a robe until two weeks before my ordination in May. I would preach in a suit, just like I did when I was seminary student in Atlanta. This kept me from the dread recognition that I was acting in more than a lay capacity when I stood up in front of the congregation of a Sunday morning. When that didn’t work, I’d go out and buy some Japanese comic books, or hang around with friends and trade crude jokes. I nearly went and bought a biker’s leather jacket, just to make the point—this is not your typical pastor.

 The best thing for keeping my denial alive was the bike accident I had back in June. It gave me an excuse to be crabby, to sit around my house and grumble and smoke cigarettes. I’m no pastor, I’d tell myself, I’m just a beat-up punk who can’t stop himself from flipping over his handlebars.

 Feeling sorry for myself slowly melted into feeling angry at other people. (Surprising how often that happens, isn’t it?) My secretary would screw up, and I’d yell at her. Or someone in the congregation would come in to yell at me, and I’d holler right back. It was a contentious summer, for good reasons and bad. I had no shortage of targets for my wrath, and my brusqueness made me a target myself. Living through a heat wave with a busted rib and a gimp arm didn’t make it any easier, nor did—well now, do you see what I mean about self-pity? I was pissed off this summer because I felt low and mean and trapped in a life I could no longer deny.

 The anger has subsided, thank God. For a while, it lived cheek-by-jowl with some old-fashioned depression and some more modern—but no less intense—bargaining. There were days when I felt like throwing up my hands and crying: it was that bad. There were days when I would pray to God to let me just get through some of my goals, then I’d move on to another church or another profession. And there were days when I simply dreaded going to work. I was afraid of what kind of phone messages I would find waiting for me. More bad news, to be sure.

 For a long time, I mourned. Even to this day, there are Sundays when I’ll wake up at four o’clock in the morning and ask, “Do I have to? Do I have to get up this morning?” Some days, I would be saddened by my calling. Some days, I would be enraged by it. And most days, I hunted desperately for a way out. I wanted very much to find some kind of signal from God about when it would be time for me to leave the church. “If I can accomplish this or that,” I’d say, “I’ll have done enough,” or “If such-and-so does or says such-and-so, I’ll have had enough, and I’ll quit. Okay, God?” But it was never quite okay. I’ve gotten past many of my early goals, and I’m still plugging away. Some of the drop-dead conditions that I set have come and gone, and I’m still in my office, trying to make the best of it.

 What got me to acceptance? It’s a mystery, acceptance of impending doom always is a mystery. We had a storm blow through the county last Tuesday. The sky turned black, the trees whipped back and forth, and the wind shot the rain to earth like so many tiny bullets. Some old trees were downed, and streets were flooded here and there. All night, we listened to windowpanes and roof shingles rattling and groaning. In the morning, all of the leaves were down from the magnolia tree in my back yard. Everyone said they’d never seen quite so many leaves collected in the gutters. After the storm passed, we had a brisk, wintry day. Bands of clouds moved across the sky, and gusts of wind shoved the door back at you when you went outside. But it was basically sunny and dry, and what leaves were left on the trees looked like a slow-motion fire spreading across the hills. It was a day to give God thanks and praise for, as long as you didn’t have to stand out in the wind.

 Another storm blew through on Saturday, this time in the form of a ticked-off parishioner. She chewed me up one side and down the other, again for good reasons and bad. She had a right to be ticked off about some things, and others—well, she didn’t have the complete story, for one thing—and I’m not sure it would have made a difference even if she had, for another. What could I do? Stand there and listen. At first, I was angry about it: I didn’t cause the mess that set her off, and I don’t want to have to clean it up. Why should I take the heat for some other, less responsible, person? I moped around, then fumed about it for the rest of the day. This just isn’t fair, I kept saying. But then Karen Elizabeth (my area conference minister), in her wisdom, pointed out to me that someone else would one day be cleaning up the messes that I had made. Pooh, I hate it when my self-righteous sulks get ruined! Then she gave me the kicker: being a pastor is all about making yourself available for people’s displacement, she said.  
 Oh? You mean this really isn’t about me?

 I felt the tension and fear and anger—the punk rock—drain out of me almost immediately. One of my roles as a pastor, I suddenly understood, was to provide a means of grace for struggling people. Not just when they’re in the hospital, and need to know why they or their loved one is suffering so much—but when their soul is in the hospital, and they need someone to lash out at so they can keep some semblance of balance in their life. The same ticked-off parishioner has come into my office twice since Saturday, and been quite sweet both times, partly I think because she’s sorry she yelled at me—but partly because the storm has passed in her, too.

 Displacement also bothers me so much because I’ve spent so much time in therapy learning how not to be someone’s emotional garbage dump. It was a hard-won achievement, and barely have I gotten to that point when God calls me back the dump. I know it’s not the same being a pastor as being the garbage collector; one has to do with my position within the community, and one has to do with allowing people to abuse me because I don’t have the self-esteem to set boundaries with them. I’ll let you decide which is which. What is similar about them, however, is that they both call for a measure of vulnerability. Ministers—and others in the helping professions, my counselor reminded me—can’t do their job without being vulnerable. That’s not the same as allowing yourself to be walked all over, I’m aware of that. But having just learned to defend myself from unwanted vulnerability, I’m a bit rattled by the prospect of having now to make the appropriate kind a part of my job description.

 Somehow, understanding all of this and being able to admit it to myself made me feel a whole lot better. I’ll leave the exact explanations to those of you who actually know something about psychology. For me, it’s enough to say that being able to claim my own weakness—that fact that I hate and fear having to deal with my parishioners emotional displacement—was enough to turn that weakness into a simple fact of life. I don’t like having to deal with this particular kind of emotional baggage. I also don’t always like having to wear a tie, either. Big deal. Things have been much easier since I got to this point (it also helps that I have a new secretary to take some of the load off). I’m calmer and more positive, and all the penny-ante crap just doesn’t bother me as much as it used to. I’m at peace, so to speak. I’m even thinking of sticking around here for a while. Imagine that!


