---
layout: post
title: Fall Housecleaning
date: '1999-08-26 00:00:00'
---


It’s been another long week around the old church—and I mean it when I say long. This week ran essentially from August 15th to today, the 26th. There was a wedding last Saturday, you see, and since I spent too much time playing last week, I had little choice but to keep on working pretty much straight through my “weekend,” i.e., Friday. What can I say? It happens.

But I’m not complaining, mind you. Everybody’s busy these days: being an adult in 1999 seems to require being practically run over by your schedule. The upshot of it is that I’m pretty tired, but dealing with it. This should surprise no one who knows me well; even my parishioners, who’ve only known me for eight months, have caught on to my continual pleadings of sleep deprivation. So far, however, they have not caught on to the notion that I would like them to be married and die at regular intervals—they insist on living their lives on their own schedules, not at my convenience. I ask you, does that sound fair? In any case, I do get two days off this week, which is a blessing. Even better, one of those days off involves a minor-league baseball game. My cup runneth over. I’m also taking a mini-vacation over Labor Day, so things will be pretty much back to normal soon enough. Just don’t call me at 2:30 in the morning, and we’ll all live through it.

Sigh. Not even beyond the first page, and I’m already wandering off topic. What I started out to say is that it’s been a pretty slow week around here, Notebook-wise, and even if I had stumbled across some juicy, prime material, my brain’s not in much shape to add the steak sauce, if you know what I mean. It’s pretty much all hamburger behind my cranium, in other words.

So I thought I’d take a breather from my relentless striving towards the Nobel Prize for literature—as if!—do a little more housekeeping around the Notebook. A couple of weeks ago, I put up some boundaries for myself concerning the topics and tones of the Notebook. Today, I’d like to try to clarify some things about the goals and audience of this shameless little column.

I wouldn’t say that I have to address any myths or misperceptions about what I’m up to here. But some of the feedback that I’ve received, both by e-mail and letter bomb, has indicated to me that I could be more clear about just what it is I think I’m trying to pull off. Contrary to prevailing opinion, I am not laying the ideological groundwork for an armed takeover of Belgium. No, far from it. I tried that a few years ago when I wrote fiction, and mostly it just confused people. It also earned me a lifetime ban from the sport of competitive waffle-making, but that’s another story.<sup>1</sup> The real goal of A Pastor’s Notebook, as you may have already guessed, is to entertain myself. Oh sure, I may occasionally inflict the odd bit of reflection upon my readers, but I can’t be held responsible for collateral damage. Can I?

What I’m joking my way around to saying is that this column is really “only” a creative outlet for me. Though I often have an idea of what I’m going to write a few days ahead of time, it does often happen that I sit down and write the first thing that comes into my head. Sometimes that means silliness about ducks, and sometimes that means something a little more serious, a little more meaty. But I never intended for the column to be a public service moment, and I never intended for it to be limited solely to theology or the life of the church. Randomness is an intentional part of the design, however. Dostoevski’s *A Writer’s Notebook*, which I take as my model, included everything from editorials on the political situation of the Balkans to literary theory to spicy human-interest stories he’d picked up in the day’s paper. The equivalent for me is simply to take whatever topic comes to hand in the life of this pastor. Might be funny, might be serious, might be a bit of each. Personally, I like the variety; that’s why I set the column up this way.

I guess the short version of all this is that I haven’t set the goals very high for this column, and that’s for a reason. I began to write here as a way of allowing myself the practice of writing. At the time, I thought that if I tried too hard, I wouldn’t be able to continue with it, just like marathoners who overdo things early on get winded on the backstretch. So I’d prefer to keep things light and easy, to save the “real” work for my sermons, and blame such insights as there may be on the workings of the Holy Spirit. But you’re the audience; you tell me what you want.

Speaking of the audience. I can’t say specifically what has caused me to think this, but somehow, I’ve got the notion that folks believe that the audience of the Notebook is limited to my clerical colleagues<sup>2</sup>. It is not. In fact, the only requirements for being a member of the Notebook distribution list are a) That you’re unlucky enough to know me, and b) That you have access to e-mail. Under certain circumstances, even requirement a) can be waived. The result is a readership composed mostly of sweet, kind, loving, upstanding and supportive people who can’t figure out why I would lump them in with my usual crew of bums, punks, freaks, Jesus-freaks, madmen, seditionists, harmonica players, anarchists and academics. For the life of me, I can’t figure this out either. It must be that I love you all, the whole cracked lot.<sup>3</sup> Which seems as good a place as any to end—I’d better, before someone decides they’ve figured out what I’m trying to say. Stay tuned for a (hopefully) more coherent essay next time. Honest.

<sup>1</sup>All lies, I assure you.

<sup>2</sup>This continues to mystify me, since the majority of my readership are not colleagues.  It’s as if the majority were convinced that they were individual exceptions to the rule.

<sup>3</sup>You may think that I’m insulting you, but this laundry list is in fact words of high praise.  Still, if you’d rather not be called loving or supportive, I apologize; I mean no harm.


