---
layout: post
title: "“Mock Duck”"
date: '1999-07-05 00:19:16'
---


Honest, I did have more responses to my duck dilemma this week. It’s just that, of the three I wanted to share, one needed to be summarized rather than printed verbatim, one got lost, and one survives.

 Well, I will try to share them as best I can, and then it’s time to move on to new theological puddles. My father wrote the first of the three responses for this week. Boiled down, his letter expressed some reservations about my continuing exploration of the meaning of ceramic lawn ducks. It seems that he was reluctant to validate the field, and felt that our intellectual energy could be put to better use. I think his exact words were: “Why don’t you just put your brain in the blender and make a pastoral daiquiri?” If those weren’t his exact words, I’m pretty sure he meant something along the same lines. As far as the duck was concerned, he thought it might be best to attach it to a not-dissimilar concrete duck lawn sprinkler at Mom and Dad’s house, which would then be dropped to the bottom of a nearby lake. I think he’s tired of ducks.

 A friend from Atlanta had a very wise and intriguing question about the duck, but I forgot to save the e-mail, and now the inquiry is lost to me. Ask again and see what happens.

 The pastor from Massachusetts who wrote in with a riff on Politically Correct Bedtime Stories thought that I’d missed her point:

> pastoring a ceramic duck is just about the same as the more animate variety of parishioner: to wit, most parishioners take my advice about as readily as does your duck. (My favorite example is of a recently widowed man who told me that he thought he might be getting ready to get rid of the house he had shared with his beloved wife for many years. I said that I thought there might be something to that idea, but that I thought he shouldn’t rush into any decisions. He had sold the house inside one week…) No matter how much I read about pastoral care, or the advice or course work I do, I usually feel like I’m talking to a ceramic duck!

Okay, fair enough. I, too, have had the feeling that I might just as well be talking to the duck. It usually helps to remember that our job as pastor is mostly to be there with people, not to change the course of their lives. But some days you wonder why you bother to open your mouth at all…On the other hand, it’s fair to point out that most parishioners at least pretend to be listening. The duck just stares back, with those cold and beady black eyes…

 My friend from MA also had a good response to last week’s central questions: “How is it that one deals with the absurdity of life honestly and ethically, without seeming like a complete goober? How do you live as a saint when you’re dying as a geek?” She replied:

> [H]ow does one deal with the ethics and absurdity of life without seeming like a complete goober? You can’t. Next question?
> 
>  Why do you characterize geeks as “dying”? There’s no bigger geek in the world than Bill Gates…and he’s really living, at least according to the most basic of measures. This is the age of the geek! And frankly, I’d be willing to bet that most of the widely acclaimed “saints” were viewed as geeks by their contemporaries (think of Francis, MLK, Mother Teresa). I think that geekiness and saintliness might be synonomous! Most Christians are pretty awkward; the ones who aren’t worry me… they are a little too slick for my tastes! I remember moving into the dorm at Andover Newton my first semester at seminary and looking around at the doors of the other women on the floor which were festooned with Argus posters featuring kitties and puppies. I thought I’d died and gone to hell; I wasn’t sure if I was the geek or they were. I still don’t know…

Other than to say that I recognize (and validate) the feeling, I think I’ll let this experience speak for itself. I will add, however, that when I wrote of “dying as a geek,” I was punning on the sense of “dying” that performers use to describe embarrassing themselves in front of an audience: “I’m dying out there!” So the question was really about how one overcomes self-awareness long enough to do some good in the world. If that seems too pretentious a response to you, then I humbly suggest that you write your own column on ceramic ducks. I’ve said what I need to say on the subject. For the moment.


