---
layout: post
title: Blues for Sleeping
date: '1999-10-21 00:00:00'
---


It’s been a rough week around the ranch. The kind of week when you’re not quite sure who’s getting fixed, the critters or you. The kind of week when an old cowhand would just prefer to sleep in—except the horse needs fed, the cows are ready to get a move on, and the pardners have already run two cattledrives and eaten a bowl of chili by the time you get up. As if that weren’t enough, those damn bluebirds of happiness insist on singing at dawn. It’s been the kind of week where your eyeballs just won’t focus anymore, your joints ache, and your stomach has that queasy feeling: what next? The kind of week where it occurs to you that sleep deprivation has become more a way of life than an occasional hurdle. That kinda rough week.

 I did manage to take Monday off. A colleague called me at home in the afternoon, but he’s always a pleasure to talk to, so I forgave him and went back to reading the paper. Otherwise, the only work I accomplished was for myself. I paid some bills, did the laundry, got a haircut and a prescription filled, went to the grocery store. All right, I did go into the office for a little while, but it was only to check the mail and feed the fish. Somebody’s got to feed the fish. I spent a long, blissful evening reading in bed—it’s not often I get to do that anymore. It was just past eleven, and I was about to go to bed when a friend called. I wanted to talk for five minutes and then cut the conversation short, but friendliness got the better of me, and we talked until 11:30.

 I tossed and turned for most of the night. It was a little chilly in the bedroom, which sometimes makes this cowboy a bit uncomfortable. (A bit guilty, too, since he knows he’s supposed to be used to roughing it out in the wilderness, under moonlit skies and all that. But what can he do? Nature makes him sneeze, and he never did like sleeping on the ground.) I was also supposed to be up at 5:30, an unnaturally early hour for me. So I kept rolling over to find warmth in the bed, and each time I rolled, I looked at the clock to make sure I hadn’t overslept. The result was a torpid half-sleep, like a bear’s hibernation, only not involving quite so much honey and fruit, and relatively little burrowing into the ground to make a den. So maybe more like when the bear wanders into some suburban neighborhood, and they have to pump him full of dope. Yeah, that’s more like it. There were also several zombie-like trips to the bathroom, but let’s not get into that. Just leave it at saying they didn’t help matters any.

 I did get up on time, and was doing surprisingly well by the time my first meeting began at 7:30. I was coherent, could form longer, more involved thoughts than the average rat, and even managed to move from one side of the building to the other without tripping over my own shoelaces. This was particularly impressive considering that I can rarely do this even on eight hours’ sleep.

 There seems to be something primitively good and decent about awaking before dawn. Winston Churchill once wrote that there was nothing like being shot at without result to concentrate one’s mind, but I’ve always thought getting up at an uncivilized hour equaled a poorly-aimed bullet. Of course, Churchill was writing about the Boer War, and I’m writing about getting up and going to meet with my colleagues. If you want to draw conclusions about relative danger, well, I guess I can’t stop you. In any case, I can focus better when I’m up early, and my energy lasts much longer over the course of the day. I always think that I’ll need a nap when I’m up with the dawn, but it never turns out to be the case. I plow right ahead past supper, feeling strong and handsome and competent. Then it gets to be about nine o’clock, and all my illusions are shattered by the weight of my eyelids pushing down on me. I’ll never be a rock star at this rate. I’m already well-qualified for a position as a grandfather, though, as established in last week’s column ([Snot-Boy](http://apastorsnotebook.com/10-blog/personal/519-snot-boy), 10/14).

 Given that I feel so much better when awaking early, you might wonder why I don’t do it regularly. Believe me, I’ve asked the same question numerous times, and have never come up with a satisfactory answer. The nearest to a rational response as I have gotten is that there’s rarely anything worth getting up for at the crack of dawn. If I had to go to work early, I’d probably do it without complaining. But I don’t have to, and my body knows it at some cellular level. My brain says, “Get up, lil’ doggies! Let’s get crackin’!” And my body says, “What, are you nuts? There’s no secretary waiting for you at the office. The people in the church are used to you getting there at nine or ten. Sleep, fool.” I suppose I have Mssr. Rene Descartes to blame for this intra-personal civil war, but philosophy is of so little comfort when the blankets are warm and the pillows soft. Damn you, Descartes! Why couldn’t you have worked on the problem of human laziness, rather than that useless search for certainty?

 The next-most rational answer I have is that I can’t get up early because I go to bed late. Tuesday was a more typical day than I like to admit sometimes: a morning meeting with colleagues, then a smaller, more intense meeting with two folks split off from the larger group. Some quiet time in the office until mid-afternoon, when I spoke to a parishioner for about an hour, then to the choir director for an equal length. A quick walk home and back to feed the cats, then a dinner and seminar at the church until almost nine. Total time spent working: fourteen hours. Come home, spend some time on the phone with the new girlfriend, go to bed late because I had to read just one more E.B. White essay. Wednesday was nearly as bad: I did have time in the afternoon to at least try to take a nap, but every time I dozed off, a cat would jump on my shoulders or bat at my head.

Apparently, they’re not impressed with my work ethic. (As if they didn’t sleep sixteen hours a day. Some workaholics they are!) Then, between a Coke at dinner and a consistory meeting that ran until 10, I was too wound up to sleep until a little after 1 o’clock this morning. I had intended to get up at 8 and be more-or-less okay, but my body shook me awake at 7. I lay there quietly for half an hour with a pillow over my head, but no dice.

Finally, I got up and turned on National Pubic Radio, which would have lulled me back to sleep had it not been for a 9 o’clock appointment to make Sunday’s bulletins with some of the church ladies.

 The result is a sort of delirium not usually seen outside of Morocco. I can barely put together ten syllables before staring off into space for long minutes. I’ve nearly ground my teeth down by half, I’m so keyed up. I have this fantastically negative attitude—I half believe my parishioners are going to come swarming through my door armed with machetes at any minute now—this, despite that one of my perennial sparring partners in the consistory stopped by a few minutes ago with her bulldog to pick up some papers and have a friendly chat. We’re working things out around here, slowly, tentatively, and I’m convinced that the ceiling’s going to fall on my head. But that’s next week’s topic. For now, let me bore with a single prayer, and then I’ve really got to go home and get some rest. O Lord, let me sleep tonight. O Jesus, still my heart and ease my breath; stand watch over my bed, so that I might awake refreshed in you. O Holy Spirit, give me stamina, a sense of humor, and a level head, even when I feel like I can’t do this one more day. Amen.


