---
layout: post
title: Politics of the Interhuman I
date: '2012-02-22 03:29:00'
---


*—First in a series*.

I am almost ashamed to admit that the recent calculated outrages from [Rick Santorum](http://www.washingtonmonthly.com/political-animal-a/2012_02/santorum_youre_not_a_christian035548.php) and [Franklin Graham](http://www.religiondispatches.org/dispatches/antheabutler/5719/graham_whistles_%E2%80%9Cdixie%E2%80%9D_on_morning_joe/) put me in mind of a classic essay by George Orwell. No, not *1984* or *Animal Farm*—those are novels, remember? I’m thinking of [“Looking Back on the Spanish War”](http://orwell.ru/library/essays/Spanish_War/english/esw_1):

> The only propaganda line open to the Nazis and Fascists was to represent themselves as Christian patriots saving Spain from a Russian dictatorship. This involved pretending that life in Government Spain was just one long massacre (vide the *Catholic Herald* or the *Daily Mail* — but these were child’s play compared with the Continental Fascist press), and it involved immensely exaggerating the scale of Russian intervention. Out of the huge pyramid of lies which the Catholic and reactionary press all over the world built up, let me take just one point — the presence in Spain of a Russian army. Devout Franco partisans all believed in this; estimates of its strength went as high as half a million. Now, there was no Russian army in Spain. There may have been a handful of airmen and other technicians, a few hundred at the most, but an army there was not. Some thousands of foreigners who fought in Spain, not to mention millions of Spaniards, were witnesses of this. Well, their testimony made no impression at all upon the Franco propagandists, not one of whom had set foot in Government Spain. Simultaneously these people refused utterly to admit the fact of German or Italian intervention at the same time as the Germany and Italian press were openly boasting about the exploits of their’ legionaries’. I have chosen to mention only one point, but in fact the whole of Fascist propaganda about the war was on this level.

Okay, that’s very funny. But actually, the part I was thinking about was this:

> Early one morning another man and I had gone out to snipe at the Fascists in the trenches outside Huesca. Their line and ours here lay three hundred yards apart, at which range our aged rifles would not shoot accurately, but by sneaking out to a spot about a hundred yards from the Fascist trench you might, if you were lucky, get a shot at someone through a gap in the parapet. Unfortunately the ground between was a flat beet field with no cover except a few ditches, and it was necessary to go out while it was still-dark and return soon after dawn, before the light became too good. This time no Fascists appeared, and we stayed too long and were caught by the dawn. We were in a ditch, but behind us were two hundred yards of flat ground with hardly enough cover for a rabbit. We were still trying to nerve ourselves to make a dash for it when there was an uproar and a blowing of whistles in the Fascist trench. Some of our aeroplanes were coming over. At this moment, a man presumably carrying a message to an officer, jumped out of the trench and ran along the top of the parapet in full view. He was half-dressed and was holding up his trousers with both hands as he ran. I refrained from shooting at him. It is true that I am a poor shot and unlikely to hit a running man at a hundred yards, and also that I was thinking chiefly about getting back to our trench while the Fascists had their attention fixed on the aeroplanes. Still, I did not shoot partly because of that detail about the trousers. I had come here to shoot at ‘Fascists’; but a man who is holding up his trousers isn’t a ‘Fascist’, he is visibly a fellow-creature, similar to yourself, and you don’t feel like shooting at him.

I can say with a straight face that Orwell is never better than this. His politics always leaves room for the human, always insists on the individual over ideological constructs. If you doubt me, read to the end of the essay where he memorializes an Italian partisan he met at the outset of the war.

It may seem like a long slide for a short run, as my friend Gil says, but reading Orwell’s story makes me wonder if Santorum or Graham could be so decent. I’d like to think they wouldn’t shoot President Obama if presented with the opportunity, but I’m not so sure that they’d be able to speak to him as anything other than the freakshow totem created by the ideology in their heads. Perhaps when they meet him, they are happy and congenial, which is almost worse than the alternative for being inauthentic. Orwell at least was able to recognize his enemy as a small man caught in a big game, like himself, and as a creature in need of grace, even if only for a moment.

Santorum and Graham make gestures, saying that they aren’t attacking the President as a person, even as they attack him as a person. I wonder if they are capable of meeting in a real sense their opposites, people who profoundly disagree with them on basic values. I question Graham’s ability to work ecumenically, which is to say, to recognize that there may be more to the body of Christ than he sees. And how on earth does Rick Santorum propose to be the president of all the citizens of the United States when he makes statements like he has? He plainly has no interest in moral diversity, or even religious. If you’re not a conservative Catholic in his mind, there’s no point in listening to you or taking into consideration your views. There is something cold and calculating about the man, like a sniper who places a crosshairs on everyone he meets, waiting only to see if they are friend or foe before his finger moves on the trigger.


