---
layout: post
title: God promising churches sheep would be pretty boss, to be honest
date: '2015-11-30 00:13:44'
---


[Jeremiah 33:14-16](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=315841866) & [Luke 21:25-36](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=315841909)

Before we get down to business this morning, let’s take care of some preliminaries.

As you know, the season of Advent is meant to help us prepare not for the celebration of Jesus’ birth, but for his return in the parousia, the second coming at the end of time. If you don’t know that, you should, since I say it about every thirty seconds this time of year.

Because we look forward in Advent—far forward—we begin with visions of the apocalypse. As Jesus tells his disciples,

There will be signs in the sun, the moon, and the stars, and on the earth distress among nations confused by the roaring of the sea and the waves. People will faint from fear and foreboding of what is coming upon the world, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken. Then they will see ‘the Son of Man coming in a cloud’ with power and great glory.

Now, partly this is to say that the transition from the way the world is presently to the Kingdom of Heaven will not be easy. There will be plenty of disruption, plenty of fear and confusion as things shake out. The old order will not go down gently. Jesus wants his disciples to be prepared.

But partly, Jesus’ words are also meant to convey the message that we’re won’t miss the apocalypse. We will have plenty of opportunities to get ready to meet our Lord. As he says toward the end of today’s gospel,

Be on guard so that your hearts are not weighed down with dissipation and drunkenness and the worries of this life, and that day catch you unexpectedly, like a trap.

It might come suddenly after a long wait, but we’ll know the moment of Jesus’ return has arrived. There will be no excuse for not having our act together.

So there’s the background for today’s message. In Advent, we enter into a period of watching, waiting, hoping, praying for Jesus’ return. We will have to wait a long while to see the fulfillment of this promise, but once that promise is kept, we’ll know it is, and we won’t be able to get away with being three sheets to the wind when it is (that’s what “drunkenness and dissipation” means). This won’t be a problem for most of us, will it? But the point is clear: we want to be ready when the roll is called up yonder.

You also may or may not know that our lectionary texts are selected gospel passage first, with epistle and Old Testament lessons chosen to complement its themes. So it is with the lesson from Jeremiah. We hear God’s promise to an Israelite nation that has been carried off into captivity in Babylon that God will restore their land, and their king’s throne as well. They will have to wait a long time to see this promise fulfilled, but eventually a new king will come, one who is descended from David. That’s the “righteous Branch” or the “stump of Jesse,” as it’s sometimes called: the family tree of David and his descendants.

The Israelites will know this king has arrived, just as surely as we know that Jesus has returned. <span class="quoteleft">The king will “execute justice and righteousness</span>,” or “judge things rightly and make everything the way it should be.” Judah will be saved, and Jerusalem will be safe again, as opposed to the way it is now.  Can’t miss it, there won’t be any Babylonians there.

As with Jesus’ message to the disciples, so too here there is a warning that things will not be easy before reaching the promised state of things. God has been angered to the point of punishing the people of Israel for violating their covenant with him. Said punishment consists of their nation falling to the Babylonians and being taken away into exile. The “be ready for the king” message is there, too, but it’s more implicit: they need to give up all those ways they have of breaking the covenant if they ever want to see their king come back. That means no lying, no cheating, no stealing, no taking advantage of widows and orphans. They should put their faith in—and follow the ways of—the God for whom these things are important. (I feel like such a dirty liberal Christian saying things like that, but it happens to be true.)

Jesus has promised to return as our king and savior. It may take a while for him to get here, and things may not be the easiest before he gets here, but get here he will. When he does arrive, we won’t miss it. When he does arrive, we’d better be ready for him. God awaits us at the end of time with open arms. It will not do to miss the opportunity.

Like the Israelites, we too have received a promise. There is the promise that our land, our community, will some day be restored. [Jeremiah says](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=315842001),

In the towns of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem that are desolate, without inhabitants, human or animal, there shall once more be heard the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voices of those who sing, as they bring thank offerings to the house of the Lord…In the towns of the hill country…and in the towns of Judah, flocks shall again pass under the hands of the one who counts them.

That will be us one day. This place will be full of the Lord’s people. I don’t believe God is promising to bring us sheep, exactly, but people, yes, and happy voices, voices that sing far better than your pastor ever could.

You could also say that we will receive a king some day, that is, that we will some day call a permanent pastor to lead us. That’s a fine prayer to have, but I will go you one better. We, like the Israelites and like Jesus’ disciples, will some day have the man himself in our midst. Advent reminds us that we are destined for a particular end, which is to be in and with the love of God. It may take some time to realize that promise. How long? Well, Jeremiah gave his prophecy almost 500 years before Jesus was born. It’s been more than 2,000 since Jesus told his disciples he would come back some day. This is probably going to take a while. In the meantime, things might not be very pleasant. <span class="quoteright">One only has to pick up the paper to see the “distress among nations”</span> that Jesus talks about. We have much violence and heartbreak, many wars and rumors of war, to go before we reach Jesus. Don’t fall away from the faith “from fear and foreboding of what is coming upon the world.” It needs you to show it God’s love and mercy.

It won’t be easy for us, either. There will be plenty of worry about making the budget, plenty of worry about who will fill the pews of our sanctuary. To tell you the truth, this congregation may not make it until Jesus comes. But the promise is not made to you or I as individuals, not even to us as a congregation. It is made to the entire children of God. Some day the Lord’s people—including us—will dance here and sing with loud and happy voices, as they will everywhere on earth. God’s promise that our lands and communities will be restored and we will live with Jesus in our midst operates on a scale of time that goes far beyond our own and involves far more people than simply us. It is, in a word, cosmic: the entire history of creation and all of humanity will come to fulfillment in that happy moment. Compared to that, the worries of our lives seem small. We are caught up in a project far larger than what happens to us or to our church, even as important as those things are to us.

But! Our job in this grand scheme is pretty simple. We are to be ready for Jesus’ return by making sure that our “hearts are not weighed down with dissipation and drunkenness and the worries of this life.” Come what may in our lives, or in the life of this community, if we can free ourselves from worry, we will have done our share. <span class="quoteleft">The season of Advent is finally a time of joy</span>, because when Jesus finally gets back here, it will be a joyful occasion. His power and his glory are directed at making our hearts glad, not filled with terror and dread. We ought to prepare to help him with that work. Amen.


