---
layout: post
title: Do you suppose we could save the church with a butterfly garden?
date: '2015-10-26 00:27:08'
---


[Jeremiah 31:7-9](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=312818124) & [Mark 10:46-52](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=312818199)

One of the most common questions churches have today is: “How do we get the young people in here?” Congregations want to know that they will be able to pass on their faith to another generation and continue their community life. Some churches would rather age out and die rather than adapt, of course, but most really would like to have younger members joining.

I also have spent a fair amount of time thinking about the question. Honesty compels me to admit that I consider it out of self-preservation as much as anything. Churches closing means fewer job opportunities for me. So I do have a selfish interest in the subject.

The recent answer to the question “How do we get young people in here?” has been: praise bands and lots of programming for children and young families. But trading organs and handbells for guitars is no guarantee that the church will grow. Neither is all the programming. Children want and need the nurture of individual attention. You can have all the activity nights you want, but without that kind of personal connection, you won’t get very far.

I found attracting families easier when I had young kids myself. People respond when they know the pastor understands their lives. The congregation has to understand as well. Many churches lose young members because the older folks are in such a rush to dump the life of the church on them, without stopping to consider the pressures they’re under. I mean, <span class="quoteleft">it’s stressful being a parent, and it’s only getting worse!</span> (My son is an angel who has never caused me a moment of grief in his life.)

The more significant issue with these strategies is that they do little if anything to pass on the faith we hold so dear. The real question isn’t “How do we get the young people in here?” It’s “How do we teach young people the depths of our faith?” We have to ask the same of ourselves, because we cannot pass on the faith without being willing to engage it actively in our own lives. It does no good to sit back and consume the faith passively. We have to live it in order for it to be attractive.

I’m sure you know what’s coming next. Many people these days are not very interested in institutional religion. You’ve heard me say that. What they seem to want is to serve, to connect with others, and to have an experience of God. They see little value in a structured community like the church to help them achieve these goals. In fact, as I said recently, they often see the church as a hindrance to getting what they need from their faith. They would be all too happy to find God in friends or in nature.

Is there nothing we can offer, then? <span class="quoteright">Must we resign ourselves to a slow death? I don’t think so, no.</span>

What we have to offer that no one else can is the gift of healing that can only come from God in Christ. Jesus shows the way when he heals blind Bartimaeus: “Go; your faith has made you well,” he says. We could just as easily translate Jesus’ words as “Go, your *trust* has made you *whole*,” or “has *saved* you,” or even “given you *peace*.” It’s one of those complex ideas that has many applications.

And it is what people want, I think. We are here because we crave the wholeness, the healing, the peace of a structured community. Others may find it outside of an institution like ours, or sometimes in church, sometimes not. The future church will have to work to demonstrate to the people outside the walls how it can offer the wellness given by Jesus to the world, but also to honor the looser-knit ways of relating that are becoming more common these days.

Whether inside the church or out, people need the same thing. We are fractured by a world that demands multiple roles of us, whether we are young or old. We are damaged by the many demands on our time, the constant overwhelming flow of information, the worry over the state of the world. We struggle to maintain relationships from a distance.

The plain fact is that this is a challenging time to be alive. Bartimaeus needed healing for his blindness, <span class="quoteleft">we need healing for our stress and anxiety.</span>

Jeremiah has a vision of what this healing might look like. God promises to bring the people of Israel back from exile, “from the land of the north…from the farthest parts of the earth,” and gather them here, in the land of Israel, to “walk by brooks of water.”

My friend [Diana Butler Bass points out](http://www.amazon.com/Grounded-Finding-World-A-Spiritual-Revolution/dp/0062328549) that whenever earth is mentioned in scripture, it’s difficult to determine if it’s being used as a symbol or meant literally. That seems to be the case here. Is God promising to draw the people of Israel back together, or is this a promise to bring them back to *this* land and *this* water? It’s hard to say, and that’s probably the point. When Jesus offers salvation to Bartimaeus, it’s not separate from the physical healing he is given. When God restores the people of Israel, it is by bringing them back to an actual, physical land. <span class="quoteright">The gift of God’s wholeness is, well, whole.</span> It’s not possible to divide it into physical and spiritual components.

A few years ago, Diana wrote [a book about vibrant mainline Protestant churches](http://www.amazon.com/Christianity-Rest-Diana-Butler-Bass-ebook/dp/B000W965PS/ref=asap_bc?ie=UTF8). She said recently that she was struck by how many of them had gardens. Some were community gardens, some grew food for the local pantry, some were flower gardens grown for no better reason than just because. Her point isn’t that gardens are good tools for evangelism, though. It’s that places deeply rooted in faith are often literally grounded in the soil. She talks about visiting a retreat center in Minnesota that has a circle cut in the center of its chapel floor to connect worshippers to the earth, and a church in California that meets outdoors in a garden the community maintains together.

I can never decide if alternative churches like this are daffy or brilliant. Perhaps a bit of both. But I read elsewhere this week about early Christian communities that had baptismal pools decorated with deer in their sanctuaries, a nod to Psalm 42: “As the deer pants for water, so my soul pants for God.” We tend to think that church building have to be centered on the pulpit and the altar, but it’s not so. Jesus left no instructions about architecture.

So imagine with me what it would be like to have an “earth well” in the center of our sanctuary. This is strictly an exercise in imagination! <span class="quoteleft">Can you smell the goodness of the soil?</span> Can you see the dirt, how black and crumbly it is? Can you imagine reaching down and touching it, gritty and moist and relaxing?

Perhaps we can also imagine things growing in the dirt: roses, maybe geraniums, nicotiana for the scent, maybe some hyacinth or lilies at Easter, even a little tree spreading up to the ceiling. Lil would insist on hostas, I’m sure. Nadine would be out of here, and I don’t blame her, but we’d replace her with some butterflies. The crickets that slip in through the front door when fall first comes around would have somewhere to go. We wouldn’t have to worry about setting up an artificial Christmas tree or flowers for the altar!

Or again, imagine a baptismal pool right at the heart of the sanctuary, with stairs leading down and space for a full immersion. What if it were fed by a natural spring, lined with rocks, and you could feel the cold, clear waters of salvation itself anytime you wanted to reach out and dip your hand in?

We had not quite a pool like this in a Mennonite church I used to hang out with. One of the kids—a young person!—created an indoor pond for a Boy Scout project. There were a few plants in it, and a little waterfall. Tea lights floated in the water. It was wonderful.

Perhaps that’s the point. I am not seriously suggesting any of these things for our church. It’s bad enough we moved the pews. But sometimes it’s useful to look at things from a different angle, to remind ourselves that we are not locked into the way things are presently, to try to reclaim the sense of wonder and awe that we lose so often in the practice of our faith. It’s worth it alone to think about receiving communion in an indoor pasture beside the still waters of a pool, or to imagine how invested our kids might be in a space they helped to nurture on behalf of the community.

<span class="quoteright">Even a little imagination is healing.</span> Much like Bartimaeus, it allows us new sight. To dream of a way for our children and grandchildren to find wonder in church is healing as well. It is a balm to our soul. It makes our community one step closer to being whole again in that it gives a vision of all the sons and daughters of the church drawn back to the mystery and promise of God-given life.

To imagine a church inviting nature into its midst is wholeness again because it begins to restore to us all the use of our senses in worship, praising, and giving thanks to our God. We can smell the flowers, touch the waters, taste the bread, hear the word, see one another. It is healing, last, to reconnect ourselves to the creation of which we are part. From ashes (or dirt) we come, and to dirt we will return someday. We are at home in nature, and to that home God calls us, no less than the children of Israel.

To answer the question I began with, then: how we get the young people in here is to offer them the gift of healing, and we offer them the gift of healing by calling them home to the inexhaustible depths of experiencing God’s love given in earth and water and spirit. You don’t have to try any of my crazy ideas about how that might be done, but it is worth dreaming a little dream about how God might be calling you to do it. Amen.


