---
layout: post
title: I suppose I have no choice but to call this "Sing ho! For the life of a bear,"
  do I?
date: '2015-10-11 21:44:02'
---


[Mark 10:17-31](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=311598700)

I don’t typically title my sermons, but if I did, this one would be called “Sing ho! for the life of a bear.”

Because as I was thinking about what to say, that line popped into my head. I choose to believe the Holy Spirit put it there. You may think something else, if you choose.

The thought occurred to me that other than Grimm’s Fairy Tales, which were indeed grim and not actually for young people, we seldom hear about any financial want in children’s literature. My title is of course taken from a Winnie-the-Pooh song by A.A. Milne:

> Sing Ho! for the life of a Bear!  
> Sing Ho! for the life of a Bear!  
> I don’t much mind if it rains or snows,  
> Cos I’ve got a lot of honey on my nice new nose,  
> I don’t much care if it snows or thaws,  
> Cos I’ve got a lot of honey on my nice clean paws!  
> Sing Ho! for a Bear! Sing Ho! for a Pooh!  
> And I’ll have a little something in an hour or two.

Winnie obviously lives a rather care-free existence. His needs are met with a comfortable little hole under some tree roots and the honey whose supply is never lacking. And so it is for the rest of the characters: Roo is cared for by Kanga, Eeyore can always find a thistle or two, and Piglet…I’m not really sure how Piglet makes ends meet, but he does.

This is the way it goes in children’s literature. I wouldn’t say that we never hear people worrying about financial woes in kid’s books, but it seems like it’s pretty rare. The honey is never-ending.

There are a number of reasons for this. Money troubles tend to be stories unto themselves, so authors ignore them so as not to get distracted from what they really want to talk about. Also, who’s going to buy a book about Mommy and Daddy are fighting because he’s out of work? Then too, kids tend not to understand money, where it comes from and where it goes and why. That whole idea that you have to work for money, that there’s only so much to go around, and you might have to sweat it sometimes is a bit abstract to them.

And of course, we don’t want them to worry. In our western society at least, we want children to believe that whether it rains or snows, there will always be plenty of honey to put on that nice new nose. More to the point, we want children to believe that Mommy and Daddy will always be able to provide for them, that we will always care for them and get them what they need, and often what they want. Then they turn 18 and we cut them right off.

<span class="quoteleft">Like so much in raising children, teaching them about money is a delicate balance.</span> The realist in us wants to teach them that they need to work, that earning a living doesn’t come without some effort, that the magic pizza will not arrive on their plate all on its own.

But we also don’t want them to worry. Most of us know that making ends meet—let alone success—involves more than a little good fortune. Or, as we Christians say, “God will provide.” There are weeks you just barely scrape by, and you just have to say Thanks be to God for that. But you don’t want to give your kids a complex. Many of you might remember parents or older brothers and sisters who lived through the Great Depression, and how tight-fisted some of those people were, how they would almost hoard against the possibility of another economic collapse. That’s not the example we want to set for our children and grandchildren. We want them to be grateful for what they have, not anxious about whether they will have enough.

On the third hand, we don’t want them to grow up to be selfish or spoiled little such-and-sos. It’s one thing to work hard and make a decent living. It’s quite another to become almost a captive to earning and spending, borrowing and spending. I don’t get the sense that many of us in this congregation are outright materialists, but if we are honest, we will admit that it’s something we all struggle with from time to time. I drive a nicer car than I absolutely must have and wear shirts that are nicer than they absolutely must be. I shop at Brooks Brothers.

When we become too attached to our things, we lose freedom and our sense of self. <span class="quoteright">When we sing ho! for the life of a bear, it is a song for a life free from want.</span> Pooh can always have a little something in an hour or two, no worries there.

This is of course what Jesus tells the rich man on the road that day. Salvation is more than just being forgiven for our sins: it is a freedom to live our lives as they ought to be lived. Freedom, in turn, is the power to be accountable to other people, in the words of Peter Block. Pooh is never so distracted by his need for honey that he cannot be there when Christopher Robin needs him. The rich man, by contrast, is tied down by his many possessions and cannot connect himself to the poor who need him. He goes away in grief because he is not free to live the good news that he has heard proclaimed by Jesus. He is not free for new life, he is not free to be himself.

Because as I say, salvation is freedom to live our lives as they were meant to be lived. The defining characteristic of Pooh Bear—other than his insatiable hunger and being of “very little brain”—is his unconditional love for Christopher Robin and the other characters of the story. He is the sort of bear who would give you the shirt off his back, if he wore one. We teach children to be like Pooh and other such generous characters as an ideal up until a certain point, and then, again, we stop suddenly. Then we teach them to be guarded and to protect their possessions. I want to know why. It’s certainly not who Jesus teaches us we were meant to be.

You can almost hear the groans of his disciples when he gives that lesson. At first, they can’t even bring themselves to react. They just stare at him blankly. He has to repeat himself to get any kind of response. Peter speaks for the disciples, as usual: “Look, we have left everything and followed you.” Why are you breaking our chops? We’re already poor! Unlike certain bears, we don’t live in a hundred-acre woods, nor in the land of milk and honey. We have to have *something* to keep going.

Jesus gets it:

there is no one who has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields…who will not receive a hundredfold now in this age…and in the age to come eternal life. But many who are first will be last, and the last will be first.

That’s a blessing again on the people who are already poor, but also on those who choose to be poor for the sake of Jesus and the sake of the good news. You can’t buy your way into heaven with material wealth. In fact, a rich person might get sent to the back of the line. Oh, they’ll still get in—with God, all things are possible—but it’s the poor who get to go first. So, the disciples shouldn’t worry about making ends meet. Like children who can take for granted that Mom and Dad will always give them what they need, so the disciples can trust that God the loving parent will always provide for them. As [the gospel of Matthew](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=311599427) says, they should consider the birds of the air, the lilies of the field, the grass that blows in the breeze. Strive for righteousness (well-being and wholeness for all people), and God will take care of the rest.

The question, of course, is how we ought to accomplish this. Do we need to go and sell everything we have? St. Francis certainly thought so. He gave away everything he owned, including his clothes. Then he went and gave away some stuff he didn’t own from his father’s shop. That was unpopular. His father wanted to lock him up as insane.

And what of you? Do you need to sell everything you own and give it to the poor? No: I choose to believe that Jesus’ advice was directed at this particular man. He knows somehow that giving everything up is what the man needs to free himself.

For us, I think the message is never to allow our material concerns to come between us and others. In that, we could have no better model than Pooh Bear, who is never so concerned with honey that he cannot reach out and take Christopher Robin’s hand. At the end of *The House on Pooh Corner*, Christopher Robin asks Pooh if he will still come to see him when he’s 100. “How will I be then?” Pooh asks. “99,” Christopher Robin tells him, and he nods. Of course he will be there with his friend. <span class="quoteleft">We were born to be with one another</span>, in the words of the traditional marriage vow, “for better or for worse, in plenty and in want, in sickness and in health,” in life and up to the moment of death. We are made for connection to one another, and in community we find life itself. Go forth, then, as disciples, free to care for one another and not concerned with coming in first. Go forth like Pooh, or Piglet if you prefer, Eeyore if you must, never worrying about more than what’s for breakfast this morning and how you can be a good friend today. Amen.


