---
layout: post
title: Paul talked about how much courage he had, then he hit the Corinthians up for
  a donation
date: '2015-06-14 19:40:33'
---


[Mark 4 & 2 Corinthians](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=301310044)

By now, you have probably noticed a common pattern in my sermons. I go on these little kicks from time to time: I get hold of an idea, and want to explore it. So it becomes the theme of a few sermons before I finally get bored and move on, or until somebody tells me that I’ve gotten bor*ing*, and it’s time to move on.

The latest theme I have been playing with—and I do hope this is the last sermon in the series—has to do with reality and how we as Christians experience it.

Two weeks ago, we talked about how simple things like an apple peeler or an ordinary Christian take on new realities as signs of God’s love for the world. Last week, it was entering into a new and very different reality in worship, as opposed to the world outside the doors of the church. This week, I want to extend the theme a bit to discuss what it means for us to see and experience reality as Christians.

Paul tells us that we “walk by faith, not by sight.” Like many of his ideas, this one needs a bit of unpacking before we can understand it correctly.

We might be tempted to say, “Paul means that you have to get through life by having faith that God exists and will take care of us if we do good things in the world.” That’s…not right. It’s much more complicated.

In the broadest context, Paul is responding to people in the church at Corinth who question his authority as their teacher because he doesn’t teach them the Jewish law like some other apostles do. His response is to say, the law is fine, it’s a good guide, but it’s a temporary thing, something that only lasts as long as you are alive in the flesh. Furthermore, Paul says, the law prevents you from seeing God face-to-face. In fact, the purpose of the law is to guide those people who can’t hack seeing God face-to-face. When God gave the Ten Commandments, he wasn’t giving them to Moses, who spent time with God on Mt. Sinai. No, the commandments were for the people who couldn’t go up into the fire and the smoke and learn God’s ways firsthand.

But when you turn away from the law to the Holy Spirit, you see the image of God himself. Not only that, but the Spirit lives within you and begins to change you, “transformed into the same image [as God] from one degree of glory to another.” In other words, there is the one earthly reality of the law, and another, higher, reality of the Spirit.

When I talked about apple peelers (and communion elements, and Christians) a couple of weeks ago, I told you that one level, they remain the same as they always were. It’s still an apple peeler, still bread and wine and person. But in the “new creation,” they acquire this new reality as signs and symbols of God’s love. So it is with Paul the teacher:

We have this treasure in clay jars, so that it may be made clear that this extraordinary power belongs to God and does not come from us.

So the Spirit lives within our bodies—the clay jars—and through them testifies to the power of God’s grace, mercy, and redemption. Because those bodies are imperfect, everybody knows it’s God at work, not us humans.

There’s one more layer here to unpack before we can fully understand where Paul’s going with this. Knowing that the Spirit and image of God live within him keeps Paul going.

So we do not lose heart. Even though our outer nature is wasting away, our inner nature is being renewed day by day. For this slight momentary affliction is preparing us for an eternal weight of glory beyond all measure, because we look not at what can be seen, but at what cannot be seen; for what can be seen is temporary, but what cannot be seen is eternal.

Our bodies do reveal something about the reality of life with God, but they also fall apart and fail at some point. (My knees remind me of this every time I bend down the wrong way.) But that’s okay, says Paul, because the Spirit that you can’t see lasts into eternity.

Growing in the Spirit means to focus on the eternal, means to walk by faith. (Paul loves these complicated, multi-layered ideas. It’s no wonder people couldn’t stand him.) The opposite of this is to walk by sight, which means to see the world by the standards of its reality, not God’s reality. Therefore, it also means to focus on the temporary, and the standards of the law.

To really bottom-line this for you, if going to gym is more important than developing your faith, you’ve got your priorities all wrong. Or more accurately, if the rules about what you do with your body—what you eat, what you drink, what you wear, who you sleep with—are more important to you than finding and living in the reality of the God who lives in you and all of us, you’re doing it wrong.

As I say, living in and focusing on the ultimate reality of the Spirit keeps Paul going. It gives him the confidence to keep preaching, knowing that whatever mistakes he makes or imperfections he possesses, in the end it’s God at work through him. That’s the important thing. The Spirit also changes how he sees other people:

From now on, therefore, we regard no one from a human point of view…if anyone is in Christ, there is a new creation: everything old has passed away; see, everything has become new!

Christians don’t judge other people by their outward appearance. I for one am deeply grateful for this. By extension, we don’t judge people by what they do with their bodies, but by how deeply they live in the Spirit, how fully they reveal to the world the true reality, which is the love of God for the world. When you see the inward, spiritual reality of God in other people, the outward, physical realities suddenly seem far less important. That’s Paul’s story, and he’s sticking to it.

This is good news for those of who do not possess movie-star good looks. (Me. I am talking about me.)

It’s also good news for people like my friends Bill and Michael, who through their loving and committed marriage testify better to God’s covenant of love better than just about any couple I’ve ever met.

It’s good news for the kind of people whose bodies take the punishment for their labor, who are crippled, maimed, damaged, who live hard and die young trying to make ends meet and provide a better life for their kids. And it’s good news for all of us whose bodies are less-than-perfect, whose health is not the greatest, who will die sooner or later. You don’t have to be perfect to enter into the kingdom of God.

More to the point, you don’t have to live for yourself. “We are convinced,” says Paul,

that one has died for all; therefore all have died. And he died for all, so that those who live might live no longer for themselves, but for him who died and was raised for them.

The reality that we are called into as Christians is the reality that we are dead. We have no life of our own. We live in Christ. Sure, our bodies keep walking around, eating and talking and doing all the things bodies do. But that’s not the true reality of the world. The Christ that lives within us, says Paul, that’s the reality. That’s the truth, the important thing.

So we should see in one another not those outward realities, because they’re dead. We should see the inward reality of Christ. That’s the living part.

It’s not just people, either. We are meant to see all of creation in the same way. All things down to the smallest blade of grass, the Orthodox Christians teach us, are filled with the presence of God, and all of them reveal to us the reality of God’s love. Out of generosity, God created the world. Out of generosity, he blessed it far more deeply and fully than we could have ever asked for or imagined.

As I just read in [an ancient liturgy](http://www.voskrese.info/spl/dionysius-lit.html):

> By Thy word the heavens were made,  
> And by the breath of Thy mouth all the celestial powers;  
> All the lights in the firmament,  
> Sun and moon,  
> Sea and dry land, and whatever is in them.  
> The voiceless, by their silence,  
> The vocal by their voices, words, and hymns,  
> Perpetually bless Thee;  
> …  
> Heaven and earth glorify Thee.  
> Sea and air proclaim Thee.  
> The sun, in his course, praises Thee;  
> The Moon, in her changes, venerates Thee.

Think about that the next time you contemplate Lake Winnebago, or look at a bed of flowers. Lil, think about that the next time the rabbits eat your hostas. They’re a sign of God’s generosity, too!

When we adjust ourselves to see by faith, rather than by sight, it does wonders. For one thing, it gets us around any number of the stupid arguments we find to distract ourselves with. If the reality is that the creation comes out of God’s generous and loving blessing, who really cares if it came into existence 6,000 years ago, or in the Big Bang 16 billion years back?

If the reality is that God created humanity out of love and for love, who really cares if a person is black or white or brown or red or yellow? Who really cares if they’re gay or straight or man or woman? The important thing is the love, the Christ that lives within that.

Once you start to look for the love of God (or Christ, it’s the same thing) in everything, God seems much closer than before. You don’t have to wait for God to speak to you out of a cloud, or in a burning bush. You can feel his presence in the sun, the rain, the earth. Even in death, you can sense his generosity. God is there, all around you, reaching out for you and for many.

And once you start to look for this hidden generosity in all things and all people, it blossoms. Jesus says just before he teaches the parable of the mustard seed,

Pay attention to what you hear; the measure you give will be the measure you get, and still more will be given you. For to those who have, more will be given; and from those who have nothing, even what they have will be taken away.

If you live by the phony and selfish reality of the world, you have nothing. But if you live with an eye to God’s generosity, and to living in and through that generosity, you will be blessed. Your blessings will grow a thousand-fold, big enough to give shade and life to the world, big enough to be a sign to the world of just how loving and gracious your God really is. You have faith in God’s blessings, those blessings grow. You have no faith in God’s blessings, they don’t grow. That’s all.

Christ has done the heavy lifting to give you those blessings. By his redemptive death and resurrection, the world lives and is filled with God.

All you have to do is see by faith and not by sight. Look at the world not through the lens of how mean, pinched and narrow it can be, through the lens of what you can get out of it for yourself, but through the lens of its ultimate reality: that God seeks to fill all in all, and to bless the world and its inhabitants richly. How you start to see this way, I will leave up to you. Amen.


