---
layout: post
title: In Heideggerian terms, Jesus' appearences enact the phenomenon of relationship
  *and* eschatology
date: '2015-04-19 22:01:51'
---


[Luke 24:13-48](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=296480335)

For the past three weeks, we have read nearly the end of three different gospels: Mark, John, and now Luke. We heard the likely original endings of Mark and John: each of them have a few verses that seem to have been added later to tie things up a bit more neatly. Luke also has a few more verses after today’s reading ends, but it’s the story of Jesus’ ascension, which we should hear just a few weeks down the road.

Each of these gospels uses Jesus’ appearances after Easter to restate their themes. For Mark, where the disciples run away from the empty tomb in terror and amazement, that means emphasizing the mystery and dislocation that Jesus’ entry into the world brings. In John, it’s doubt, belief, obedience and peace. Luke emphasizes how <span class="quoteleft">Jesus is the fulfillment of God’s promises made in Hebrew scripture</span>, how he sponsors a new kind of community, and how that community is meant to be shared with the world.

Now, in the interest of full disclosure, the gospel lesson for this Sunday is supposed to be much shorter. I added the first two paragraphs in order to expand the story a bit, and so you can see the themes a little better.

For example, when Jesus joins the disciples, they are discussing what happened on Easter. They have two models for understanding Jesus, both of which are drawn from the Old Testament: he was a *prophet*, they say, a wonder-worker like Moses or Elijah or Elisha. Or, they hoped, he was a *messiah* like David, come to set the people of Israel free. But they haven’t quite been able to make the imaginative leap that would allow them to understand how Jesus fulfills the scripture in a new and surprising way. That’s what he explains to them, “beginning with Moses and all the prophets.” Later, he’ll repeat this lesson with all the disciples in Jerusalem: “Everything written about me in the law of Moses, the prophets, and the psalms must be fulfilled.”

As he begins his lesson, Jesus has a few harsh words for the two disciples he meets on the road to Emmaus: “Oh, how foolish you are, and how slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have declared!” I think it’s probably best to understand this as followers of Jesus speaking to themselves: can you believe we were such idiots that we didn’t get this?

Jesus teaches the disciples just like any rabbi would. But his lesson plan wouldn’t work with just any old teacher. It is his presence with them that opens up their minds and their hearts to true understanding. Cleopas and his friend get it when Jesus breaks the bread and gives it to them. Once they are fed with his body, they can see world rightly. When he appears in Jerusalem, it’s the other way around: first he shows them his hands and his feet, then he eats a little fish, then he begins to open the scripture to them.

Having Jesus’ body there with them is enough to make the disciples into full believers. Up until this point, they have been “foolish” and “slow of heart.” Now their education is complete, and they are almost ready to become the church we know from the book of Acts.

Soon Jesus’ body will depart and be replaced by the continuing presence of the Holy Spirit. Despite that transition, however, I think there is a lesson for us here. I am not one to complain about social media. It’s lovely stuff and quite distracting, in fact. But for all the Facebook and Twitter and Pinterest and so on and so forth, <span class="quoteright">there is simply no replacement for being present to one another in our bodies</span>.

I use a much-abbreviated version of the first two paragraphs of this lesson to introduce the communion service when I go out to see our homebound members. I want them to hear the good news that Jesus has not forgotten about them. He will continue to draw near to them as they walk along, and so will we. I encourage you to go see our friends who cannot be with us on a Sunday morning. I know they appreciate the visits, because they tell me so. They like to be reminded that there is still a community out there pulling for them, even when they are not able to be physically present to it.

It takes courage to go out to see people at home or in the hospital or at a nursing home, to be honest. You don’t know what to say, or how long to stay, or how to bear the pain that people sometimes share with you. I’m not complaining about my job, mind you. It just comes with its own set of challenges. Knowing how hard it is for me to visit sometimes is a good reminder of how difficult it would be for you all to do the same thing.

It helps me to remind myself of what I am supposed to be doing on these visits: not so much to speak as to listen, or at the very least to engage in conversation, rather than a one-way monologue, to adjust to what the other person needs, to let them be themselves, to affirm our relationship, to name and accept the struggles they’re going through. I can do that, and so can you. You don’t need to know what to say. You only have to be willing to listen for what God is trying to say. It’s usually “I love you all.”

Still, <span class="quoteleft">visiting our friends isn’t always easy</span>. It requires us to come out of ourselves, to do things outside of our comfort zone. But as challenging as it is, it reflects the nature of God himself, who time and again announces his intention to draw near to us, to be present to us, to live with and among us.

“Us” is the right word here. Jesus “came near” the two disciples on the road to Emmaus, and then to the community of disciples in Jerusalem. In fact, the only time Jesus ever appears to an individual after his resurrection is in the gospel of John, where he speaks to Mary Magdalene. Even then, Peter and John are in the tomb, just steps away. The promises that God makes about being present are made to communities, not this believer or that one. When we refuse to let illness or physical separation tear down the community that we have built up, we testify to our God, who saves us in, through, and for community.

That community is of a special kind, as I say. There are all sorts of communities out there, or things that pass for community. But only Christian communities are built on the ongoing presence of Christ and the hope for the future he provides. We acknowledge as reality that “We who are many are one body, for we all share the one bread,” as it says in the communion liturgy. We are gathered together because Jesus, the man of Nazareth, has fulfilled all the promises of God. In doing so, he has called us together into loving community based on those same practices that we use in visitation: listening, adjusting, letting people be themselves, affirming one another and the mutual relationship, accepting the inevitable struggles, sharing power as equals. I won’t do it, but we could get a pretty good sermon series on how all of these things turn up in the book of Acts.

<span class="quoteright">Friends, we’re pretty good at these things</span>. You have heard me say before that churches like ours were formed to serve the needs of small communities. Mission accomplished, as far as I’m concerned. You all know how to love and support one another. God is at work in you to continue and extend that mission, and you go, girl.

You have heard me say it before, but it bears repeating: God will provide the resources you need for the mission of this community. We so often talk about church as though we needed a building, a pastor, and people with the ability to pay for them in order to do anything of any worth. But the earliest Christians—the people who knew Jesus and watched him eat a piece of fish when he was supposed to be dead—they didn’t have any of those things. What they had was all they needed, which is one another, and the presence of the risen Christ saying Peace be with you, Peace be with you. We’ve got both of those. They are our hopes and our dreams fulfilled in the present day, the beginnings of heaven popping up all around them. Why shouldn’t we have some fun with them? Amen.


