---
layout: post
title: People walk and talk about Jesus hands (I just want to see his feet)
date: '2015-05-17 21:01:04'
---


[Ephesians 1:15-23](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=298894648) [Acts 24:44-53](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=298896030)

I want to talk this morning about Jesus’ feet.

Pastor. Come again?

No, seriously. I want to talk about Jesus’ feet, of all things.

Now, I know what you’re thinking: *he’s finally cracked, didn’t think it would take him this long*. But hear me out. You could probably spin an entire sermon out of Jesus’ careworn feet, how dusty and calloused they were from walking the dirt roads of Israel healing and preaching the word of God to the people, how appropriate it was for Mary to bathe them with her hair in honor of the sacrifice that he made for us in his earthly ministry. You could get another whole sermon out of the wounds in his feet and hands from the crucifixion, and how those wounds are transformed in the resurrection. Maybe you could do a long one, taking us all the way from Jesus’ baby shoes up to the holes he shows Thomas after Easter.

And then there’s today. There are many depictions of the Ascension in Christian art that feature the disciples staring up at Jesus’ feet as the rest of him rises out of the picture. Some of them are quite funny, to tell you the truth. You see just Jesus’ feet at the top of the frame, and then the disciples below looking completely baffled: *What just happened here?* Sometimes, there are men around the disciples, a reference to [Acts 1:11](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=298895896), where two men in white robes appear, saying

Men of Galilee, why do you stand looking up toward heaven? This Jesus, who has been taken up from into heaven, will come in the same way as you saw him go up in heaven.

In other words, quit wasting your time staring at the sky. You have better things to be doing. Show’s over, move it along. This is how Luke closes out the post-Easter section of his story and moves into Pentecost. The disciples now must give up on the earthly form of Jesus and look to the Holy Spirit for comfort and guidance. Naturally, the church uses Ascension Day in the same way: it wraps up the Eastertide season and begins the transition to Pentecost, where we learn of the gift of the Holy Spirit and begin to contemplate what it means to live as disciples in the Spirit. That theme will carry us all the way back to Advent next year.

I have been reading a very good book lately, on building community by naming and claiming the gifts God has given to the community. The author describes one of the exercises he’s done with struggling congregations:

I invited one group of rural church leaders to imagine that overnight, across denominations, God killed all the clergy, struck every church with lightning and burnt them all to the ground, then evaporated the bank accounts of every congregation. They were left with no money, no clergy, no buildings…just a smoking pile of ash in the center of their town and a funeral to attend.

And then he asks them to figure out what they had left with which to do ministry.

As much as I don’t want to encourage anyone to think they can do it without me, much less encourage them to contemplate my funeral, I think we might try this exercise in the fall. Because, to be honest, you *don’t* need me to do ministry. You don’t need a pastor, you don’t need a building, you don’t need any money. You have everything you need to minister to your community without those things, because God will supply what is needed.

In fact, God has already provided, if we care to look for it. God has gifted this congregation with many strengths, talents, and resources—all it needs and more—and they are just waiting to be uncovered.

But if even without a minister, without a building, without money, without intangible assets to put to use, even if you possessed not a single discernible gift, you would still have what you needed, because you would have Jesus’ feet.

Oh, pastor. This again? We thought you had forgotten.

Yes! You would have his feet to bless, gift, and empower you.

Because in those baby feet, you would have the record of what it means to be loved by God, as a mother or a father loves an infant.

In those feet: dusty, calloused, bruised, and worn out, you would have the example of God’s love shared and poured out in faithful ministry.

In those feet, pierced by nails and yet alive, you would have a sign of the power of God’s love in the resurrection and what it means to have life after death.

Above all, in those feet, rising in the sky on their way to heaven, you would have the promise of God’s love: not just to fill us with the comfort and guidance of the Holy Spirit, as important as that is, but that his love will not quit us, now or in the world to come.

If you visit a Catholic or a Lutheran church, they will sometimes have a statue of the ascended Jesus over the back door of the sanctuary. You might mistake it for another crucifix, if you don’t look closely. Jesus’ arms are outstretched, and you can see the holes in his hands and feet. But he’s not on a cross, and he will be clothed, sometimes wearing a crown. In an Orthodox church, it might be a painting over the door. The idea is that in the chancel, we remember what God has done for us, particularly in Jesus’ sacrifice on our behalf. But when we go out into the world, we go out with the promise that God continues to act on our behalf. We leave worship as people transformed and empowered by the promise of God’s continuing love for us.

With that love behind us, we have everything we need to live as Christians. Without it, we have nothing.

I should emphasize, “the *promise* of that love,” because that’s what we see in the story of the Ascension, and because in the end, that’s all we really have. Promise is God’s way of calling us into the future and pulling us ever closer to him. We have to wait for some unspecified time to come before God’s promises are finally fulfilled. In the meantime, we have wait on God, and attend to the ways in which his promises unfold in the world around us. God is the eternal sower and we live forever in spring, watching the flowers bloom, wondering and hoping about what comes next, if you want to think of it that way. I firmly believe that any way of speaking of our faith that does not begin with the promises of God isn’t worth a hill of beans.

Promises, of course, are just that, promises, not iron-clad guarantees. This is the irreducible element of faith: we just have to trust and pray that God keeps the promises he has made to us.

Paul prays for the fulfillment of God’s promises to the Ephesian congregation, that they may receive “wisdom and revelation,” that their hearts may be “enlightened,” that they may know “the hope to which he has called you,” the “riches of his glorious inheritance,” and the “immeasurable greatness of his power.” God has used that power to install Christ on the heavenly throne, and “put all things *under his feet.*” But this is not simply to establish Christ’s glory, or to make him the celestial ruler, but “for the church, which is his body, the fullness of him fills all in all.” The promise of God’s love is finally this: that our destiny is not our own, but in Christ. His humble, battered, loving feet will be our own, and will rule over every “rule and authority and power and dominion,” in love and for love, “not only in this age, but also in the age to come.”

Don’t ever tell me that this church, or any church, doesn’t have what it needs. As long as we have the feet, and the hands, and the body of Christ, we have far more than we could ever ask for or imagine. Amen.


