---
layout: post
title: Who among us has not stared up at the night sky and wondered why everything
  is so fuzzy?
date: '2016-02-21 21:47:46'
---


[Genesis 15:1-12](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=323090755)

Years ago, when I served my little country church just south of Campbellsport in Washington County, we lived in the parsonage next door to the sanctuary. The church itself was built in 1879, and is virtually identical to St. Paul’s from the outside.

The parsonage was built not long after the church, presumably. It was rectangular, rather than square like your parsonage—but like yours, it had sheltered generation after generation of ministers and their families, until recent years. Unlike yours, however, the house never stood empty: the church was able to rent it out both before and after we lived there.

Our house stood in a straight line along the county road next to a parking lot, the church, an old schoolhouse, and the cemetery. Surrounding all of this was a line of very tall old pine trees, some of them 50 feet high or more. They sighed in the wind, a sound I will never forget, almost like water running over the stones in a brook.

A few houses squatted here and there around us, but mostly, it was just open fields. The kids’ school, with its enormous lawn, was on the other side of the church property, the two separated by a large stand of tiger lilies planted by a former pastor’s wife. The kids could walk right out our back door and over into the playground in the morning. <span class="quoteright">In the summer, when the peonies and lilacs bloomed and bumblebees drifted in the breeze around the clover, you could be forgiven for thinking it was a little slice of heaven.</span> I miss it sometimes.

It wasn’t perfect, of course. The basement was everything you might expect and worse. Bats got in the place regularly. When enormous farm equipment wasn’t rattling down the road, there were motorcycle clubs. You haven’t lived until you’ve heard 100 Harley hogs pull out from a stop sign. Then there was that obnoxious bar down the street.

But there was one very relevant upside to the place: it was dark out there. That was one thing when the coyotes would come to visit and leave paw prints behind, or the night I thought I caught a bobcat moving fast under a light at the school. It was another when the sky was clear and the stars were shining.

Right about now was the best time to go stargazing, actually. Summer was too humid, November and December usually too cloudy. But along about January or February would come a cold snap. The usual pattern was to have a mountain of snow dumped on us. Then, when the blizzard had cleared, <span class="quoteleft">the clouds would roll off for points east, and the temperature would drop to something awful below zero</span>. If you got lucky, there would be a new moon, and the sky would be dark and dry and so sharp you’d swear you could cut your fingers on the neon edges of the stars. Late at night, I would bundle up and wade through the snow sometimes up to my knees behind the church to the back of the cemetery, right next to the pine trees, where it was darkest. There I would just gaze up at the stained glass of heaven for as long as I could take it, until my throat ran sore with the dry air, and my nose began to feel like it was beginning to freeze solid. I have seen the most stars in the mountains of Colorado, far away from any city lights. But I have seen them best here in Wisconsin, under the boughs of a pine tree that cracked and shuddered and dropped an enormous load of snow straight down my jacket one night.

Genesis doesn’t tell us in which season the Lord chose to visit Abram’s tent by the oaks of Mamre. I like to imagine that it was winter, though, the better to pull his follower outside and reveal to him the dramatic sky, full of God’s intentions for the already old man. If so, there is a nice piece of irony at work in this story: Abram counting after dot after dot of promised new life filling the heavens while all around him the world lies dormant and lifeless.

It would be a fitting setting for the scene in another way as well. <span class="quoteright">God has given Abram “this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates</span>,” but without children, he can’t keep it. He can’t even use it, really. Without children and grandchildren to help him work and occupy the land, God might as well have promised him enough room to plant a vegetable garden for a couple of years, maybe. Or to put it in terms of the seasons, it’s nice that God gave Abram the land, but without a family, it’s not going to produce any more life than a frozen patch of ice and snow. Since the point of God’s promise is that Abram will have eternal life through his children and their use of the land, this is something of a problem.

In that, Abram’s story tells us something universal about the human condition. Many of us have been in the position of wondering whether we would have children to continue our lives and our memories into succeeding generations. Who will come after me?

We share this as well: we are stuck between the reality of death and the promise of life. We all live in the bleak midwinter awaiting hopefully the arrival of spring, whether or not we have ever stepped on a patch of Winnebago ice. Abram had already waited many years for the Lord’s promise to be fulfilled, and still had many years yet to wait. We too have to wait, in trust and hope.  
As we wait, it’s not doubt that we feel, exactly. It wasn’t doubt that Abram felt either, so much as a need for reassurance. We feel it too: a good friend like Janice dies, or one like Audrey falls and injures herself. It gives us pause. We hear of some senseless shooting in the news. We read the latest about our changing global climate and think about what sort of world we’re leaving our children and grandchildren. We wonder how long our families will continue after us, how the kids will stay healthy, get jobs, find someone to settle down with and raise children of their own. We go through all these things, and we think like Abram: “Are you sure, God? I know you said you would bring new life, but are you sure?”

In response, God gives his word. To Abram, that means another promise: “Look toward heaven and count the stars, if you are able. So shall your descendants be.” To us, that means his Son, Jesus Christ, the Word of God, as a promise that new life will come.

And…that’s pretty much it, actually. I would dearly love to tell you how the stars in the night sky prove that God will continue to bless us, but they don’t. <span class="quoteleft">I’d love to tell you that Jesus himself is proof that we will continue to receive the gift of new life, but he isn’t.</span> Oh, he is plenty reassuring to you and I, but he is not an objective proof of God’s new life. He is a revelation of that life. When God shows Abram the stars, when he shows us the face of Jesus, he reveals something of himself, something that can only be accepted as proof for those who already have faith.

In Abram’s case, what is revealed is that the same God who made the heavens now promises him an heir. With Jesus, we learn that the same God who brought Jesus into the world, and brought him back from the dead now promises us life. If God can bring life where there is no life, he can do what he told us he would do. That might not make sense to anyone who doesn’t believe in God, but for those with the eyes of faith it is as plain as day.

This isn’t very satisfying, logically. Our rational minds want to nail down the proof as tight as we can, to put God’s power beyond any doubt. But what we learn is that we can have certainty with God, or we can have relationship, not both. God doesn’t work for burnt offerings on a transactional basis like those other gods. Abram believes God’s promise to him, and the Lord “reckons it to him as righteousness.” Which is to say, he accepts Abram’s trust in him and puts it down to Abram wanting to be his friend. Friends, you understand, don’t demand absolute proof. They trust in love, even if it does take a very long time for a promise to come true.

<span class="quoteright">Sometimes, when the promise does arrive, it comes in an unexpected way.</span> Abram can’t imagine that anyone other than Eliezer his servant will be his heir. When he fathers Ishmael by Hagar, he assumes that’s it, the promise is done, and God has to remind him that no, Sarah will have a child.

I expected to be at that parsonage in Washington County for a very long time. I wanted to raise kids there, retire from that congregation. I had no idea that it would be children other than my own growing up there. When I gazed up at the stars on those winter nights, I thought I’d already received the promise, not that I had much more wandering to go before I got to it. I had no clue that after years of disruption and being sidetracked, of thinking that I was done with ministry in the United Church of Christ, I would wind up back in a country church with its own parsonage, finding new life there.

And what new life! You couldn’t have expected, after your parsonage sitting vacant for so long, that it would be buzzing with new, life-giving activity, not from your pastor’s family, but from the food pantry. I think I counted three or four mothers with children in the short time I was there during Friday’s distribution.

Nor, I think, could you have anticipated what would come to pass after Janice’s death: that at least some of her beloved perennial flower beds will be transplanted to new landscaping around the parsonage. (I hope for Dwight’s sake that the new beds will also help attract some butterflies.)

<span class="quoteright">Nor could anyone have predicted the number of children we suddenly seem to be overrun by here at St. Paul’s.</span> Talk about life where there was none!

Spring definitely seems to be on the way. The fulfillment of God’s promises to us seem to be drawing closer. We may yet have another freeze, of course—this weekend’s weather won’t last—and it may be some time before things come to their final conclusion. But here, now, in the winter of Lent, we take the time to look up at the sky and hear again God’s word to us, for he is faithful and will keep all his promises to us. Spring will come, Easter will come, God’s promises will come, when the time is right. Amen.


